Deutsche Bank




Annual Report
2021
Deutsche Bank                                                        Deutsche Bank
Annual Report 2021




Deutsche Bank
Financial Summary
                                                                                                                                                     2021                 2020
Group financial targets
Post-tax return on average tangible shareholders' equity1                                                                                          3.8 %                0.2 %
Cost/income ratio2                                                                                                                                84.6 %               88.3 %
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                                                                13.2 %               13.6 %
Leverage ratio (fully loaded)                                                                                                                      4.9 %                4.7 %

Statement of Income
Total net revenues, in € bn.                                                                                                                         25.4                 24.0
Provision for credit losses, in € bn.                                                                                                                 0.5                  1.8
Total noninterest expenses, in € bn.                                                                                                                 21.5                 21.2
Adjusted costs ex. transformation charges, in € bn.3                                                                                                 19.6                 19.9
Profit (loss) before tax, in € bn.                                                                                                                    3.4                  1.0
Profit (loss), in € bn.                                                                                                                               2.5                  0.6
Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders, in € bn.                                                                                    1.9                  0.1

                                                                                                                                             Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
Balance Sheet
Total assets, in € bn.                                                                                                                              1,324               1,325
Net assets (adjusted), in € bn.4                                                                                                                    1,002                 963
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses), in € bn.                                                                                                  476                 432
Average Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses), in € bn.                                                                                          446                 438
Deposits, in € bn.                                                                                                                                    604                 568
Allowance for loan losses, in € bn.                                                                                                                    4.8                 4.8
Shareholders’ equity, in € bn.                                                                                                                         58                  55

Resources
Risk-weighted assets, in € bn.                                                                                                                       352                  329
  Thereof: Operational Risk RWA, in € bn.                                                                                                             62                   69
Leverage exposure, in € bn.                                                                                                                        1,125                1,078
Tangible shareholders' equity (Tangible book value), in € bn.4                                                                                        52                   49
High-quality liquid assets (HQLA), in € bn.                                                                                                          207                  213
Liquidity reserves in € bn.                                                                                                                          241                  243
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                                                                                                  82,969               84,659
Branches                                                                                                                                           1,709                1,891

Ratios
Post-tax return on average shareholders’ equity1                                                                                                    3.4 %                0.2 %
Provision for credit losses as bps of average loans                                                                                                    12                   41
Loan-to-deposit ratio                                                                                                                             78.9 %               76.0 %
Leverage ratio (phase-in)                                                                                                                           4.9 %                4.8 %
Liquidity coverage ratio                                                                                                                           133 %                145 %

Per Share information
Basic earnings per share                                                                                                                          € 0.96               € 0.07
Diluted earnings per share                                                                                                                        € 0.93               € 0.07
Book value per basic share outstanding4                                                                                                          € 27.62              € 26.04
Tangible book value per basic share outstanding4                                                                                                 € 24.73              € 23.19
1
    Based on profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders after AT1 coupon. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-
    GAAP Financial Measures” of this report.
2
    Total noninterest expenses as a percentage of net interest income before provision for credit losses, plus noninterest income.
3
    The reconciliation of adjusted costs is provided in section “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures/ Adjusted costs” of this document.
4
    For further information please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this report.


Due to rounding, numbers presented throughout this document may not sum precisely to the totals provided and percentages may not precisely reflect the absolute figures.
Content   Deutsche Bank Group
          II     Letter from the Chief Executive Officer
          V      Management Board
          VI     Report of the Supervisory Board
          XIV    Supervisory Board
          XVII   Strategy



          1   — Combined Management Report
          2    Operating and Financial Review
          34   Outlook
          41   Risks and Opportunities
          54   Risk Report
          171  Sustainability
          173  Employees
          177  Internal Control over Financial Reporting
          179	Information pursuant to Section 315a (1) of the German Commercial
               Code and Explanatory Report
          182	Corporate Governance Statement pursuant to Sections 289f
               and 315d of the German Commercial Code
          183  Standalone Parent Company information (HGB)



          2   — Consolidated Financial Statements
          190    Consolidated Statement of Income
          191    Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
          192    Consolidated Balance Sheet
          193    Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
          195    Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
          197    Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
          233    Notes to the Consolidated Income Statement
          240    Notes to the Consolidated Balance Sheet
          394    Additional Notes
          355    Confirmations



          3   — 	Compensation Report
          367    Compensation of the Management Board
          397    Compensation of members of the Supervisory Board
          400    Comparative presentation of compensation and earnings trends
          402    Independent auditor’s report
          404    Compensation of the employees (unaudited)



          4   — 	Corporate Governance Statement/
                 Corporate Governance Report
          418    Management Board and Supervisory Board
          430    Reporting and Transparency
          430    Related Party Transactions
          431    Auditing and Controlling
          434    Compliance with the German Corporate Governance Code



          5   — 	Supplementary Information
          440    Non-GAAP Financial Measures
          449    Declaration of Backing
          450    Group Five-Year Record
          451    Imprint / Publications
Deutsche Bank Group




II     Letter from the Chief Executive Officer
V      Management Board
VI     Report of the Supervisory Board
XIV    Supervisory Board
XVII   Strategy
Deutsche Bank                                     Letter from the Chief Executive Officer
Annual Report 2021




Letter from the Chief Executive Officer
Dear Shareholders,

2021 was a pivotal year for Deutsche Bank. We achieved a pre-tax profit of € 3.4 billion and a net profit of € 2.5 billion.
Compared to the previous year, we more than quadrupled our net profit and produced our best results in a decade.

This puts us exactly where we wanted to be at this point when we announced our “Compete to win” strategy in the summer of
2019. We have laid the foundation for sustainable growth by delivering what we promised in a disciplined manner:

– In our four business divisions, we have focused on our core strengths and withdrew from non-core segments. This strategy
  is bearing fruit. Although we discontinued activities such as equities trading, our revenues in the full year 2021 were € 25.4
  billion, higher than in 2018. It is particularly gratifying that all four core businesses contributed to this revenue growth last
  year.
– Despite the cost of our transformation, we reduced our total non-interest expenses to € 21.4 billion, compared to € 25.1
  billion in 2019. Adjusted costs (ex-transformation charges and reimbursable Prime Finance expenses) were € 19.3 billion
  in 2021 and our cost-income ratio fell from 108 to 85 % in this period. Over the past three years we recognized € 8.4 billion
  in transformation-related effects. This means we have put behind us 97 % of the total of these effects we anticipate by the
  end of 2022. Nevertheless, we continued to invest in technology and growth and, in particular, strengthened our controls,
  on which we spent € 3 billion over the last three years.
– We finished 2021 with a Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio above 13 % despite absorbing the transformation-related
  effects and significant changes in the measurement of regulatory capital. We successfully offset an impact of 130 basis
  points on our capital ratio arising from these regulatory effects.
– We managed to do this with our existing resources and without asking you, our shareholders, for additional capital. Many
  market observers did not believe this was possible in mid-2019. And this now puts us in a position to distribute capital to
  you again. This year, we will propose a dividend of 20 cents per share to the Annual General Meeting. This corresponds
  to a total distribution of around € 400 million. In addition, we have decided to repurchase shares worth € 300 million in the
  first half of the year.

This track record of execution has given us a strong tailwind. We have created a virtuous cycle in which the positive effects
reinforce each other. The successes of recent years have significantly improved our reputation, and our employees’ trust in
our bank is strong again. This new self-confidence and restored pride are felt by our clients, which has a positive effect on our
business. This also led all three of the world's leading rating agencies, Moody's, Fitch and S&P, to upgrade us in 2021.The
associated lower refinancing costs are now helping our businesses.

All this gives us the confidence to stick to our goals for 2022. Our focus is on the target of an after-tax return on tangible equity
of 8 %.

Unfortunately, a shadow has fallen over the world in recent weeks. With the Russian invasion of Ukraine, war returned to the
heart of Europe. We cannot yet fully assess the full impact of this war on the political world order, on the global economy, on
our clients and on our bank.

But we as Deutsche Bank have proven in the COVID-19 crisis that we are stable and crisis-proof - and that we are there for
our clients in difficult times with our strong balance sheet and our first-class risk management.

We intend to focus even more strongly on the needs of our clients as we now embark on the next stage of our strategy. This
is not about revolution, but evolution. We will continue to build on what we have done successfully over the last three years
and become even more efficient.

At the same we must steadily change and improve the way we work to fulfil our potential and be what we have aspired to be
for more than 150 years: your Global Hausbank. A bank that is the first point of contact for corporates, institutional investors,
retail clients and affluent clients in all financial matters, with a global network and local expertise, unique risk management
and an outstanding ability to create solutions, modern technical platforms and a strong product suite.




                                                                                                                                   II
Deutsche Bank                                    Letter from the Chief Executive Officer
Annual Report 2021




We have strong foundations for this aspiration which in my opinion are stronger than any other bank in Europe. This has first
and foremost to do with our strong home market. We are rooted in Europe's largest and most stable economy, an economy
with excellent growth opportunities. Germany's corporations and Mittelstand companies are world leaders in many areas. They
need a strong and global bank by their side, just as Germany’s savers need an adviser to offer them investment opportunities
and its government needs a partner to support the transition to a sustainable economy. That can only be us. And as such, we
want to grow with our clients.

We are also well positioned to support our clients in a world that is changing rapidly, both politically and economically. The
events in Ukraine are a depressing illustration of how uncertain the geopolitical situation has become. This is compounded by
profound macroeconomic shifts: the historically unprecedented phase of fiscal and monetary stimulus, low or even negative
interest rates and ever higher debt is coming to an end, in the view of our economists. At the same time, the decades-long
trend of globalization is stalling and we are experiencing a regionalization and fragmentation of global supply chains that
seemed hardly possible just a few years ago. Finally, the reversal of the population pyramid will significantly accelerate in
coming years and decades, with serious consequences for already stretched labor markets and pension systems.

All of this is happening at a time when our clients are undergoing a profound transformation: the transition to a sustainable,
climate-friendly and increasingly digital economy.

We are convinced that, precisely in times like these, the expertise and competence of a Global Hausbank is particularly needed
and that we can be part of the solution for our clients. We will support them by helping to manage their risks, by financing their
transformation and by enabling them to invest in assets whose returns exceed inflation to build wealth.

With our global network and our more than 20,000 relationship managers worldwide, we are ideally positioned for this in all
four businesses:

– Our Corporate Bank is the financing and transaction banking partner that can support corporations and medium-sized
  companies in 151 countries worldwide.
– Our Investment Bank has global capital market expertise that no other European bank can deliver. And we are one of the
  global market leaders in fixed income and currencies.
– Our Private Bank is the strongest partner for all questions on financing and investment for our private clients in Germany
  and provides sophisticated wealthy clients and family entrepreneurs all over the world with tailor-made investment
  solutions.
– Our Asset Management business offers a wide range of active, passive and alternative products that allow investors to
  position themselves for any market scenario.

However, it is not only about positioning in the individual business areas, but also about overarching topics of our generation.
In recent years, we significantly expanded our expertise in environmental, social and governance or ‘ESG’ areas, across all
businesses. We are well on our way to achieving our target of € 200 billion in financing and investment by 2023, as early as
2022. We also set ourselves the goal of enabling more than €100 billion in ESG financing and investment annually from 2023
onwards. This enables us to offer our clients the appropriate green products and solutions to prepare them for the sustainable
transformation of the economy.

In 2021, we joined forces with many other major international banks and committed to reducing the emissions of the projects
we finance to net zero by 2050. We will only be able to achieve this in partnership with our clients, which is why we
systematically enter into a dialogue with them about how they can transform.

Overall, we are ideally positioned to support our clients globally in a solution-oriented manner. And we have shown during the
COVID-19 pandemic what we can achieve when we put clients’ needs at the centre of everything we do.

This position of strength is what fuels our optimism for the coming years. We are convinced that we have great potential in all
areas. But we also know that we need to invest to leverage this potential. We need to invest in technology, invest in our global
network and in local knowledge, but also invest in our advisory capacities and our product and management expertise.

We have to fund these investments while delivering improving profits and capital returns to our shareholders and will therefore
remain very disciplined on cost. We still see a lot of potential here by further reducing the complexity of our organization. We
are convinced that we will be able to reduce costs by approximately € 2 billion by 2025 and will use these savings to finance
our investments.




                                                                                                                               III
Deutsche Bank                                   Letter from the Chief Executive Officer
Annual Report 2021




The combination of cost discipline, investments in our strengths and consistent implementation of our strategy should put us
on a robust and sustainable growth path. We have set ourselves further financial targets for this: we aim to increase our
revenues on average by 3.5 to 4.5 % annually so that we can achieve a revenue level of approximately € 30 billion in 2025.
By then, our cost-income ratio is expected to fall below 62.5 %, so that we can achieve a post-tax return on tangible equity of
more than 10 %.

And, of course, we are determined to increase the capital distribution to you, our shareholders, based on a continued business
success. Subject to meeting our strategic targets, AGM authorizations and regulatory approvals, we plan to increase the
dividends per share by 50 % annually from the financial year 2021 to 2024 and we will look to undertake the balance to the €
5 billion we have previously communicated as share buybacks. From 2025 onwards, we will target a 50 % total pay-out ratio,
which subject to meeting our performance targets would imply € 8 billion in cumulative capital distribution in respect of the
financial years 2021 to 2025. A Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio which remains robust at approximately 13 % should
enable us to do so.

It is our goal to create value for all our stakeholders: for you, our shareholders, for our clients, for our employees and for
society as a whole. We have set ourselves an ambitious set of goals, and we know how to achieve them. By strengthening
our position as a Global Hausbank, we have laid the foundation. If we implement this strategy with the same discipline we
have shown in implementing our strategy since 2019, we will become exactly what you expect us to be: a strong bank playing
a leading role in shaping the future of banking.




Best regards,




Christian Sewing

Chief Executive Officer
Deutsche Bank AG
Frankfurt am Main, March 2022




                                                                                                                            IV
Deutsche Bank                                    Deutsche Bank
                                                 Management    Group
                                                            Board
Annual Report 2021




Management Board
Christian Sewing, *1970                                                Management Board in the ­reporting year:
since January 1, 2015                                                  Christian Sewing
Chief Executive Officer                                                Chief Executive Officer

                                                                       Karl von Rohr
                                                                       President
Karl von Rohr, *1965
                                                                       Fabrizio Campelli
since November 1, 2015
President                                                              Frank Kuhnke
                                                                       (until April 30, 2021)

                                                                       Bernd Leukert
Fabrizio Campelli, *1973                                               Stuart Lewis
since November 1, 2019
Chief Transformation Officer (until April 30, 2021)                    James von Moltke
Corporate Bank and Investment Bank (since May 1, 2021)                 Alexander von zur Mühlen

                                                                       Christiana Riley
Bernd Leukert, *1967                                                   Rebecca Short
since January 1, 2020                                                  (since May 1, 2021)
Chief Technol ogy, Data and Innovation Officer                         Stefan Simon



Stuart Lewis, *1965
since June 1, 2012
Chief Risk Officer


James von Moltke, *1969
since July 1, 2017
Chief Financial Officer


Alexander von zur Mühlen, *1975
since August 1, 2020
Regional CEO for Asia Pacific


Christiana Riley, *1978
since January 1, 2020
Regional CEO for America


Rebecca Short, *1974
since May 1, 2021
Chief Transformation Officer


Stefan Simon, *1969
since August 1, 2020
Chief Administrative Officer




                                                                                                                  V
Deutsche Bank                                   Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




Report of the Supervisory Board
In the 2021 financial year, the Supervisory Board performed all tasks assigned to it by law, regulatory requirements, Articles
of Association and Terms of Reference.

The Management Board reported to us regularly, without delay and comprehensively on all matters with relevance for our
bank, and in particular on business policies and strategy, in addition to other fundamental issues relating to the company’s
management and culture, corporate planning and control, compliance and compensation systems. It reported to us on the
financial development, earnings and risk situation, the bank’s liquidity, capital and risk management, the appropriate technical
and organizational resources as well as events that were of significant importance to the bank. We were involved in decisions
of fundamental importance. As in previous years, the Management Board provided us, in accordance with our requests, with
enhanced reporting on several topic areas. Thus, the Management Board regularly reported to us on the prevention of money
laundering and the related controls. We deliberated on these matters intensively and regularly, together with the Management
Board and also with external experts. Furthermore, the Supervisory Board received reports on the progress made in the bank’s
sustainability strategy and its contribution to achieving global climate objectives. The Supervisory Board Chairman and the
five other committee chairs maintained regular contact with the Management Board between the meetings. They also
consulted each other on the agendas of the various meetings of the committees they chair and discussed topics of key
strategic importance to the bank. Furthermore, upcoming decisions were deliberated on and prepared in discussions
conducted regularly between the Management Board and the Chairman of the Supervisory Board as well as the chairs of the
Supervisory Board committees.

There were a total of 66 meetings of the Supervisory Board and its committees. When necessary, resolutions were passed by
circulation voting procedure between the meetings.


Meetings of the Supervisory Board in plenum
The Supervisory Board held seven regular and two extraordinary meetings in the 2021 financial year. At its meetings, the
Supervisory Board addressed all topics with a special relevance for the bank.

Again in 2021, we attached special importance to the effective implementation of the bank’s strategy, and we took sufficient
time to deliberate on this and on the regular progress reports on the individual business divisions and regions with the
Management Board. In this context, we also discussed the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the development of business
and compared developments within the framework of benchmarking. Also, our discussions regularly focused on regulatory
topics that impact our business worldwide and on key litigation cases and regulatory proceedings.

At our meeting on February 3, representatives of the Joint Supervisory Team responsible for the bank reported to us on the
Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) 2020 along with the key observations from this process for our bank. We
analyzed the submitted target-actual business figures and compared them with the plan figures as well as analysts’ estimates
and competitors’ figures. Deviations were discussed in detail. Furthermore, we confirmed the preliminary proposal of the
Management Board, as communicated upon the announcement of the new strategy in 2019, not to pay a dividend. We
addressed the strategic financial and capital plan at the Group level for the years 2021-2025 and discussed aspects of our
compliance and anti-financial crime programs. We discussed the key activities of the Human Resources area in 2020 and an
outlook on the strategic priorities for the following years. We approved the report, prepared by the Nomination Committee, on
the assessment to be performed annually of the Management Board and Supervisory Board in accordance with Section 25d
of the German Banking Act (KWG) for the year 2020. Furthermore, we addressed the draft of the Corporate Governance
Statement, reviewed the independence of the individual Supervisory Board members and determined that all shareholder
representatives are independent. In addition, we adopted the diversity concept for the composition of the Management Board
and the Supervisory Board. Following a review of the appropriateness of the compensation system for the Management Board
– and while taking the recommendations of the Compensation Control Committee into account as well as in consultation with
the bank’s Compensation Officer and independent external compensation experts – we determined the level of the variable
compensation for the Management Board members for the 2020 financial year. Furthermore, we discussed the new
compensation system for the Management Board, which became applicable starting 2021. We also discussed the possible
topics for the Supervisory Board’s training measures for the ongoing financial year.

At our meeting on March 11 we extensively discussed the proposal from the shareholder representatives on the Nomination
Committee to nominate Mr. Frank Witter at the General Meeting for election to the Supervisory Board. Mr. Alexander Schütz
had previously informed us that he would resign effective at the end of the General Meeting on May 27. We received a detailed
market and competitor analysis, which also comprised a strategic benchmarking. Following reporting by the Management
Board, and based on the Audit Committee’s recommendation as well as after a discussion with the auditor, we approved the
Consolidated Financial Statements and Annual Financial Statements for 2020. Also in accordance with the recommendation



                                                                                                                             VI
Deutsche Bank                                   Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




of the Audit Committee and the recommended resolution proposal of the Audit Committee specified above, we determined
that there are no objections to be raised regarding the Group’s separate Non-Financial Report in accordance with section
315b of the German Commercial Code (HGB) and the Non-Financial Statement in accordance with section 289b HGB, also
based on the final results of the Supervisory Board’s own inspections. We discussed and approved the Report of the
Supervisory Board and received a follow-up report from the Management Board about the bank’s Russia franchise, including
an assessment of the business and risk. The Management Board also presented to us the design of the compensation
systems, the Human Resources Report for 2020, which was prepared for the first time in accordance with International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard 30414, and the results of a survey on the future of work and a hybrid working
model. Furthermore, we addressed the topics for the General Meeting, approved proposals for the agenda and for
accommodating shareholder rights.

At an extraordinary meeting on March 29, we addressed the realignment of the Management Board in depth, which was also
accompanied by the launch of the next phase of the bank’s transformation: With effect from May 1, we transferred responsibility
for the Corporate Bank and Investment Bank divisions from Mr. Christian Sewing to Mr. Fabrizio Campelli. We also resolved
to extend Mr. Christian Sewing’s appointment as member and Chairperson of the Management Board until the end of April
2026. With effect from the end of April 30, 2021, Mr. Frank Kuhnke resigned from his Management Board mandate and left
Deutsche Bank. Furthermore, we appointed Ms. Rebecca Short as member of the Management Board for three years with
functional responsibility for the Chief Transformation Office, with effect from May 1, 2021. These resolutions were taken on
the basis of the preliminary work and recommendations of our Chairman’s Committee and Nomination Committee. In addition,
Mr. Stuart Lewis informed us of his wish to step down from the Management Board effective at the end of the General Meeting
2022, which we will comply with. The search process for a successor was subsequently launched. Furthermore, we discussed
the possible issuance of Additional Tier 1 capital instruments on the basis of the authorization granted by the General Meeting
on May 24, 2018.

At our meeting on May 26, we discussed all of the topics of the pending General Meeting with the Management Board.
Furthermore, we noted the report of the Management Board on changes in the regional advisory councils in Germany in
accordance with Section 8 of the Articles of Association and we addressed various regulatory and legal topics.

On July 29, the Management Board reported on the financial performance for the second quarter and on the reactions of the
bank’s different stakeholders to the progress of its transformation. In addition, we extensively discussed a detailed report on
the strategy to combat financial crime risks, including the regulatory requirements and technological support and the required
data infrastructure. Furthermore, we deliberated on and approved several amendments to our Terms of Reference.

At our meeting on September 16, we discussed the Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) disclosure allegations
involving DWS. We discussed the possible issuance of Additional Tier 1 capital instruments and received a detailed overview
of the medium-term macroeconomic outlook. We also discussed various internal investigations. Furthermore, we addressed
the Audit Tender in depth and resolved to recommend Ernst & Young (EY) at the General Meeting as the financial statements
auditor for the 2022 financial year.

At our meeting on October 28 and 29, we intensively addressed the bank’s strategy and the status of the transformation from
the perspective of the individual business divisions, regions and central strategic measures. We discussed the current global
economic situation, the medium-term outlook and the impacts on the bank. We received a report on the progress made in
implementing the strategy and on the positive feedback from stakeholders, along with an outlook on further progress in the
ongoing execution of the bank’s transformation. We discussed the key regulatory development around the world and what
they mean for the bank’s individual regions. Furthermore, we received a report on the technology strategy and deliberated in
this context on trends in technology, such as blockchain and the potential areas of use. We also addressed our bank’s
sustainability strategy. As periodically scheduled, we resolved to approve the Declaration of Conformity.

At another extraordinary meeting on November 21, we addressed the succession for the Chairman of the Supervisory Board
and for the Chief Risk Officer. The Nomination Committee had intensively addressed these personnel matters in advance,
based on our internal position descriptions and profile of requirements, and prepared candidate proposals in each case. We
deliberated on the candidates selected on the basis of the approved selection process. Following the meeting we resolved
through circulation voting procedure to propose Mr. Alexander Wynaendts for election as member of the Supervisory Board
at the next Ordinary General Meeting on May 19, 2022. Furthermore, we intend to elect him as our Chairperson. We also
resolved to submit a proposal at the next Ordinary General Meeting on May 19, 2022, to create the function of a second
Deputy Chairperson and we appointed Mr. Olivier Vigneron as member of the Management Board for the period of three years
with effect from May 20, 2022.

At our last meeting of the year on December 16 we deliberated with our Management Board Chairman on key people and
succession planning for the Management Board. The Supervisory Board discussed the key milestones of the planning process
2022-2026 and received a report on the new “Future of Work” model. We extensively reviewed our internal policies and
procedures as well as the position descriptions for the Management Board and Supervisory Board. In addition, we resolved
to extend Mr. Fabrizio Campelli’s Management Board appointment by three years to October 31, 2025. We determined who



                                                                                                                           VII
Deutsche Bank                                     Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




our financial experts and compensation experts are as well as the independence of our Audit Committee members, and we
amended the Terms of Reference for the Audit Committee to reflect changes from the Act to Strengthen Financial Market
Integrity (FISG).


Committees of the Supervisory Board
The members of the individual committees and the changes during the year 2021 are specified in the Annual Report in the
Corporate Governance Statement (see page 429).

The Chairman’s Committee held thirteen meetings in 2021. The Committee addressed Management Board and Supervisory
Board matters in depth, in addition to ongoing topics between the meetings of the Supervisory Board as well as the
preparations for them. These include, among other things, the preparatory handling of the re-alignment of the Management
Board’s functional responsibilities and the personnel changes on the Management Board in cooperation with the Nomination
Committee. The Committee deliberated on topics in connection with the bank’s corporate governance and in preparation for
the General Meeting as well as a few special issues. These included individual regulatory topics, such as the specification of
details during the issuance of capital instruments by the bank. The Committee also addressed the mandates, honorary offices
or special tasks of the individual Management Board members outside the Group as well as the review of the pending
expirations of the statute of limitations periods (time barring) for possible claims to compensation for damages subsequent to
the compensation settlement concluded in July 2017. As necessary, resolutions were approved in this context.

At its seven meetings in 2021, the Risk Committee focused on the topics: the risk appetite aligned to the bank’s strategy and
conditions in client business. In this context, besides the Group risk appetite, the Committee addressed in particular the
business units of the International Private Bank, the Corporate Bank’s Correspondent Banking and Cash Management
businesses and the Investment Bank’s Leveraged Lending business. In terms of regional perspective, the Committee focused
on the Middle East and Africa region. Against the backdrop of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, the Risk Committee
addressed the management, accounting treatment and valuation of credit risks with a special focus on the management and
liquidation of collateral and the development of credit loss provisions. In addition, the Committee also focused on the general
risk appetite framework for non-financial risks and the following specific non-financial risks: model risks, product governance,
third-party risk management, business continuity and physical safety, employment practices risks, transaction processing risks
and reputational risks.

The Committee regularly addressed reports on key transformation projects with a connection to risk management. In 2021,
the Committee received reports on the programs for the further development of credit risk management, liquidity management
and the management of interest rate risks in the banking book. It also intensively addressed the impacts of the compensation
framework on the bank’s capital, risk, liquidity and profitability situation.

In light of the still changing risk environment due to the ongoing pandemic and the change in the inflation situation, the
Committee addressed the potential effects on the bank and the measures taken in response by the bank. This covered the
impacts on the bank’s capital, risk, liquidity and profitability situation while taking into account, among other things, adverse
scenarios within the framework of internal stress testing. The Committee also received reports on the European Union-wide
stress tests conducted by the European Banking Authority and European Central Bank.

The Audit Committee met seven times in 2021. The Audit Committee supported us in monitoring the financial reporting process
and intensively addressed the Annual Financial Statements and Consolidated Financial Statements, the interim and earnings
reports well as the Annual Report on Form 20-F for the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Furthermore, it supported
us on the basis of the financial reporting process in the assessment of the bank’s transformation and the COVID-19 pandemic,
in particular with regard to the recognition of credit loss provisions. The Audit Committee also dealt with the valuation of various
financial instruments and the bank’s pension liabilities as well as tax-related topics. The Audit Committee had the Management
Board report regularly on the “available distributable items” and the capacity to service the coupons on the Additional Tier 1
capital instruments.

The Audit Committee monitored the effectiveness of the risk management system, in particular with regard to the internal
control system and Group Audit, while also taking into account the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and the bank’s
transformation. This also again covered, among other things, the reporting on the ongoing development of controls to combat
money laundering and to prevent financial crime, transaction monitoring, payments systems and the key initiatives for the
further strengthening of the risk management system, compliance and the internal control system. The Audit Committee was
kept up-to-date on the work of Group Audit, its audit plan and its resources. It addressed measures taken by the Management
Board to remediate deficiencies identified by the auditor, Group Audit and regulatory authorities and regularly received updates
on internal findings management as well as the status of and progress on the remediation of findings.




                                                                                                                                VIII
Deutsche Bank                                      Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




Over the course of the year, the Audit Committee intensively addressed EY as the financial statements auditor and was
assured of the independence of EY through an ongoing review by the bank and by EY itself. Following all analyses and
deliberations, the Audit Committee resolved that the recommendation be made to the Supervisory Board and subsequently to
the General Meeting that EY be appointed as the independent auditor of the Annual Financial Statements and Consolidated
Financial Statements 2022.

In this context, the results of the independence review were taken into account, whereby there were no indications of grounds
for an apprehension of bias or a risk of impaired independence. The Committee also deliberated on the proposal for the fee
agreement to be reached with the auditor for the 2021 financial year. The Audit Committee dealt with the measures to prepare
for the audit of the Annual Financial Statements and Consolidated Financial Statements for 2021, specified its own areas of
focus for the audit and approved a list of permissible non-audit services. The Audit Committee was regularly provided with
reports when accounting firms, including the auditor, were engaged to perform non-audit-related services. The Committee
also addressed the key audit matters presented in the auditor’s report, the separate Non-Financial Report as well as the Non-
Financial Statement. EY also reported to the Audit Committee on the quality of the audit, so that the Committee could assess
this on the basis of suitable indicators.

The Head of Group Audit and representatives of the auditor attended all of the Audit Committee meetings. However, the
auditor’s representatives were not in attendance for agenda items dealing specifically with the auditor.

Audit tender procedure for 2022

In the context of the insolvency of Wirecard AG, EY was publicly criticized for its work as auditor of Wirecard AG. Against this
backdrop, both the Audit Committee and the Supervisory Board considered it advisable to provide the bank with scope for
action through a renewed tendering of the audit mandate for the year 2022. Therefore, the Audit Committee decided to carry
out a selection procedure for appointing the auditor for Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group for the 2022 financial
year.

In accordance with Article 16 (2) of the EU Regulation (No. 537/2014), the entire selection procedure was carried out in a fair,
transparent and non-discriminatory manner. To support an efficient and successful audit tender process, the Audit Committee
delegated the administration of this to the Audit Tender Team and the preparations for the selection decision to an Evaluation
Panel, comprising Audit Committee members, the Chief Financial Officer as well as staff members of the Finance department
and other infrastructure areas of the bank. During the entire process, the Audit Committee was ultimately responsible and held
final decision-making authority.

Through the public announcement of the audit tender process, all auditing firms were invited to express their interest in
participating in the selection process. Furthermore, in addition to responding to a list of questions, all auditing firms participating
in the process had the opportunity to give their presentations at meetings with the Evaluation Panel. Besides purely quantitative
and qualitative selection criteria, the Audit Committee intensively examined the question of reputation and independence
against the backdrop of the Wirecard incidents and took them into consideration in the selection process. Furthermore, regular
discussions were conducted between the Legal Department, Finance and EY to review developments in connection with
Wirecard. Following the conclusion of the procedure and on the basis of a detailed report on the procedure as well as the
assessment of the candidates, the Audit Committee issued its recommendation for two candidates at its meeting on September
15, 2021, to the Supervisory Board. Within the framework of this recommendation, there was a preference for EY.

The Nomination Committee met ten times. In 2021 the Committee focused intensively on succession planning and personnel
matters for the Management Board and Supervisory Board in consideration of the statutory and regulatory requirements. In
addition, in consultation with the Chairman’s Committee, the Nomination Committee prepared the extension of the
appointments of Mr. Christian Sewing and Mr. Fabrizio Campelli and prepared the recommendation for the appointments of
Ms. Rebecca Short and Mr. Olivier Vigneron to become Management Board members. Furthermore, the Committee resolved
to recommend, in each case based on the shareholder representatives’ recommendations, that the Supervisory Board propose
that Mr. Frank Witter (2021) and Mr. Alexander Wynaendts (2022) be nominated for election to the Supervisory Board at the
respective General Meetings. For the selection of Mr. Frank Witter, Mr. Alexander Wynaendts and Mr. Olivier Vigneron, the
Committee engaged external recruitment advisors for the selection process. A thorough and systematic selection process
took place with both internal and external candidates.

The Committee also supported us in the implementation of potential improvements identified through the assessment carried
out in 2020 and intensively prepared the assessment of the Supervisory Board and Management Board for 2021 at several
meetings and in discussions with the Management Board members. Details on this are provided in the Corporate Governance
Statement. In addition, the Committee prepared the review of our internal policies and procedures, and addressed topics
related to the suitability (“fit and proper”) of members of the Supervisory Board and Management Board (including individual
induction plans) and reviewed the Management Board’s training plan for 2021.




                                                                                                                                    IX
Deutsche Bank                                    Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




The Compensation Control Committee met six times in 2021. It monitored the appropriate structure of the compensation
systems for employees and, in particular, for material risk takers and the heads of control functions. In addition, it addres sed
the Compensation Report for the 2020 financial year, the Compensation Officer’s Compensation Control Report and the
Report in accordance with Section 12 of the Remuneration Ordinance for Institutions (InstitutsVergV) on the appropriateness
of the compensation system and underlying compensation parameters with regard to their compatibility with the bank’s
business and risk strategies, which concluded that the compensation systems are appropriately structured and in accordance
in principle with the requirements of the InstitutsVergV. The Committee concurred with this assessment. Another focal point
was addressing the Compensation Report for the 2021 financial year on the compensation of the Management Board and
Supervisory Board. Based on changed statutory requirements, this is to be submitted for approval by the General Meeting
2022 and is to be published along with the auditor’s opinion.

The Compensation Control Committee submitted proposals to us regarding the compensation of the Management Board, in
consideration of the targets and objectives agreed for the 2020 financial year, as well as proposals for the targets and
objectives for the Management Board for the 2021 financial year. The Committee also addressed the changes from the
realignments of the areas of functional responsibility on the Management Board with a corresponding adjustment of the
individual objectives. The Committee supported us in monitoring whether the internal control units as well as all other material
areas were involved in the structuring of the compensation systems and, together with the Risk Committee, assessed the
effects of the compensation systems and variable compensation for the 2020 financial year on the risk, capital and liquidity
situation. The Management Board reported to the Compensation Control Committee on the procedures for identifying material
risk takers and Group-level material risk takers as well as for determining and allocating the total amount of variable
compensation for the bank’s employees, while taking into account, in particular, affordability.

At its meetings, the Compensation Control Committee received reports on the Management Board’s communication with the
regulatory authorities on compensation topics and changes in the regulatory framework relating to compensation.
Furthermore, it addressed regulatory developments and regulatory findings on compensation topics and addressed the
examination of the existence of the preconditions for the suspension, forfeiture or claw-back of elements of the variable
compensation of (former) members of the Management Board and issued corresponding resolution proposals with
recommendations for courses of action for the Supervisory Board.

The Integrity Committee met six times in 2021. The focal points of the work of the Integrity Committee in 2021 were on, among
other things, the topics of corporate culture, Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) issues, preventive compliance
control, legal and regulatory proceedings, as well as Human Resources practices and Consequence Management.

The Strategy Committee met three times. At its meetings, the Committee regularly addressed the ongoing implementation of
the bank’s strategic transformation and progress on the underlying Key Deliverables (KDs) of the transformation initiatives as
well as the assessment of the bank’s portfolio of businesses. It addressed the competitive environment, in particular with
regard to consolidation of the banking sector in Europe. Within the framework of “Business Reviews”, the Committee examined
the individual business divisions. Furthermore, it received reports on the operating organization and – against the backdrop
of the realignment of the areas of responsibility as of May 1, 2021 – on the “Front-to-Back” transformation and effects on the
operating processes. The Committee addressed the latter topic area together with the Technology, Data and Innovation
Committee.

The Technology, Data and Innovation Committee met five times. The Committee received reports on the retail banking
platform and the ongoing migration program. Furthermore, the technology platforms of various business and infrastructure
units were discussed. Another focus was information security, where the reports covered various areas, for example the de-
risking strategy, key focus topics and a few industry-wide incidents. In addition, the Committee regularly received reports on
the progress of the cloud transformation program and discussed other aspects of modernizing the infrastructure. Furthermore,
the Committee discussed the bank’s data management and received various reports on deep dives into individual types of
data. Another focal area was innovation topics. Furthermore, the Committee addressed the progress made in the technological
aspects of reducing positions in the Capital Release Unit (CRU), findings in connection with the IT systems and technology-
related regulatory topics.

Meetings of the Mediation Committee, established pursuant to the provisions of Germany’s Co-Determination Act (MitbestG),
were not necessary.




                                                                                                                               X
Deutsche Bank                                   Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




Participation in meetings
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, meetings were conducted mostly by video conference. The Supervisory Board members
participated in the meetings of the Supervisory Board and of the committees in which they were members as follows:

                                               Plenum                             Committees              Total
(Number of meetings /
participation in %)                            No.            in %                No.          in %       No.             in %
Dr. Paul Achleitner                            9/9            100 %               57/57        100 %      66/66           100 %
Chairman
Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein                    9/9            100 %               13/13        100 %      22/22           100 %
Frank Bsirske                                  6/6            100 %               23/24        96 %       29/30           97 %
(until September 26, 2021)
Mayree Clark                                   9/9            100 %               20/20        100 %      29/29           100 %
Jan Duscheck                                   9/9            100 %               12/12        100 %      21/21           100 %
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck                         9/9            100 %               9/9          100 %      18/18           100 %
Sigmar Gabriel                                 8/9            89 %                6/6          100 %      14/15           93 %
Timo Heider                                    9/9            100 %               11/11        100 %      20/20           100 %
Martina Klee                                   9/9            100 %               5/5          100 %      14/14           100 %
Henriette Mark                                 9/9            100 %               10/10        100 %      19/19           100 %
Gabriele Platscher                             9/9            100 %               13/13        100 %      22/22           100 %
Detlef Polaschek                               9/9            100 %               39/39        100 %      48/48           100 %
Deputy Chairman
Bernd Rose                                     9/9            100 %               18/18        100 %      27/27           100 %
Alexander Schütz                               4/4            100 %               3/3          100 %      7/7             100 %
(until the General Meeting, May 27, 2021)

John Thain                                     9/9            100 %               3/3          100 %      12/12           100 %
Michele Trogni                                 9/9            100 %               15/15        100 %      24/24           100 %
Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel                           9/9            100 %               19/19        100 %      28/28           100 %
Stefan Viertel                                 9/9            100 %               10/10        100 %      19/19           100 %
Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann             9/9            100 %               35/35        100 %      44/44           100 %
Dr. Theodor Weimer                             9/9            100 %               7/7          100 %      16/16           100 %
Frank Werneke                                  1/1            100 %               ---          ---        1/1             100 %
(from November 25, 2021)
Frank Witter                                   5/5            100 %               5/5          100 %      10/10           100 %
(from the General Meeting, May 27, 2021)


Corporate Governance
The composition of the Supervisory Board and its committees is in accordance with the requirements of the German Banking
Act (KWG) as well as regulatory governance standards. The suitability of each individual member was assessed internally by
the Nomination Committee. The European Central Bank (ECB) also reviews the professional qualifications and the personal
reliability of our members within the framework of its “Fit & Proper” assessment. At the time of this report, this assessment
was available for all members except Mr. Frank Werneke, as he was appointed by way of court order on November 25, 2021,
and the ECB’s review had not yet been completed. The suitability assessment covers the expertise, reliability and time
available of each individual member. In addition, there was an assessment of the entire Supervisory Board’s knowledge, skills
and experience that are necessary for the performance of its tasks (collective suitability). The Joint Supervisory Team and the
Nomination Committee continually monitor the suitability of the Supervisory Board members.

The Chairman of the Supervisory Board and the chairpersons of all the committees are independent in accordance with the
Terms of Reference applicable from time to time. They coordinated their work continually and consulted each other regularly
and – as required – on an ad hoc basis between the meetings in order to ensure the exchange of information necessary to
capture and assess all relevant case matters and risks in the performance of their tasks. The cooperation in the committees
was marked by an open and trustful atmosphere.

The committee chairpersons reported regularly at the meetings of the Supervisory Board on the work of the individual
committees. Regularly before the meetings of the Supervisory Board, the representatives of the employees and the
representatives of the shareholders conducted preliminary discussions separately. Before or at the end of the meetings of the
Supervisory Board and its committees, discussions were regularly held in “Executive Sessions” without the participation of the
Management Board.

The Supervisory Board determined that the following members of the Audit Committee are “Audit Committee Financial
Experts” as such term is defined by the implementation rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission issued pursuant
to Section 407 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002: Dr. Paul Achleitner, Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel, Dr. Theodor Weimer, Professor
Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann and Mr. Frank Witter. These Audit Committee Financial Experts are “independent” of the bank, as
defined in Rule 10A-3 under the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In accordance with the provisions of Sections 107 (4)



                                                                                                                            XI
Deutsche Bank                                      Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




and 100 (5) of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG) as well as Section 25d (9) of the German Banking Act (KWG), they
have the required expert knowledge in financial accounting and auditing.

Pursuant to Section 25d (12) of the German Banking Act (KWG), at least one member of the Compensation Control Committee
must also have sufficient expertise and professional experience in the field of risk management and risk controlling, in
particular, with regard to the mechanisms to align compensation systems to the company’s overall risk appetite and strategy
and the bank’s capital base. The Supervisory Board determined that Dr. Paul Achleitner, Chairman of the Compensation
Control Committee, and Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel fulfill the requirements of Section 25d (12) of the German Banking Act (KWG)
and therefore have the required expertise and professional experience in risk management and risk controlling as
“Compensation Control Committee Compensation Experts”.

The Supervisory Board shall be composed such that the number of independent members among the shareholder
representatives will be at least six. The following shareholder representatives are independent: Dr. Paul Achleitner, Ms.
Mayree Clark, Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck, Mr. Sigmar Gabriel, Mr. John Alexander Thain, Ms. Michele Trogni, Dr. Dagmar
Valcárcel, Dr. Theodor Weimer, Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann and Mr. Frank Witter.

Dr. Paul Achleitner and the chairpersons of the committees engaged regularly in discussions with representatives of various
regulators and informed them about the work of the Supervisory Board and its committees and about the cooperation with the
Management Board.

During the 2021 financial year, Dr. Paul Achleitner, in his capacity as Chairman of the Supervisory Board, conducted
discussions, together with the bank’s Investor Relations Department, with investors, proxy advisors and shareholders’
associations. The subjects of the discussions were governance and strategy topics from the Supervisory Board’s perspective,
questions of appointments, the bank’s control processes, Management Board compensation, the bank’s Environmental, Social
and Governance (ESG) strategy as well as the succession planning for his position.

At several meetings of the Nomination Committee and of the Supervisory Board in plenum, we addressed the assessment
prescribed by law of the Management Board and the Supervisory Board for the 2021 financial year, which also comprises the
self-assessment according to the German Corporate Governance Code. The final discussion of the results took place at a
meeting of the Supervisory Board plenum on February 2, 2022, and the results were set out in a final report. For further
information, we refer to the “Supervisory Board” section in the Corporate Governance Statement.

The Declaration of Conformity pursuant to Section 161 of the Stock Corporation Act (AktG), which we had last issued with the
Management Board in October 2020, was reissued in October 2021. The text of the Declaration of Conformity, along with a
comprehensive presentation of the bank’s corporate governance, can be found in the Annual Report 2021 and on the bank’s
website at https://www.db.com/ir/en/documents.htm. Our Declarations of Conformity since 2007 are also available there, in
addition to the currently applicable versions of the Terms of Reference for the Supervisory Board and its committees as well
as for the Management Board.


Training and further education measures
We held several training sessions again in 2021. They were conducted in most cases by external subject matter experts, but
also by internal experts. In accordance with our adjusted Profile of Requirements for Supervisory Board members, the training
topics we focused on in 2021 were Anti-Money Laundering, Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) issues, as well as
Digital Assets and Currencies. Furthermore, we received an update on the regulatory topics of the year 2021.

For the new members that joined the Supervisory Board, extensive induction courses tailored to them individually were
developed and carried out to facilitate their induction into office.


Conflicts of interest and their handling
To prevent a potential conflict of interest with his function as Chief Executive Officer of Deutsche Börse AG, Dr. Theodor
Weimer did not participate in discussions regarding the topic of euro clearing.

Mr Witter informed us that he is party to a class action against Ernst & Young (EY) to assert claims to compensation for
damages due to losses incurred from a Wirecard bond. Through an in-depth discussion with Mr Witter, the Supervisory Board
was able to assure itself that the resulting potential conflict of interest does not stand in the way of an unrestricted participation
on the Supervisory Board and Audit Committee.




                                                                                                                                  XII
Deutsche Bank                                  Report of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021




Annual Financial Statements, Consolidated Financial Statements, and the
combined separate Non-Financial Report and Compensation Report
EY audited the Annual Financial Statements and Consolidated Financial Statements, including the accounting and the
Combined Management Report for the Annual Financial Statements and Consolidated Financial Statements for the 2021
financial year and issued in each case an unqualified audit opinion on March 7, 2022. The Auditor’s Reports were signed
jointly by the Auditors Mr. Mai and Mr. Lösken.

Furthermore, EY performed a limited assurance review in the context of the combined separate Non-Financial Report as well
as the Non-Financial Statement (Non-Financial Reporting) and in each case issued an unqualified opinion on March 7, 2022.
EY issued a separate unqualified opinion for the Compensation Report on March 7, 2022.

The Audit Committee examined the documents for the Annual Financial Statements 2021 and Consolidated Financial
Statements 2021 as well as the Non-Financial Reporting 2021 at its meeting on March 8, 2022. Representatives of EY
provided the final report on the audit results. The Chairman of the Audit Committee reported to us on this at the meeting of
the Supervisory Board. Based on the recommendation of the Audit Committee, and after inspecting the Annual Financial
Statements and Consolidated Financial Statements documents as well as the documents for the Non-Financial Reporting –
following an extensive discussion on the Supervisory Board as well as with the representatives of the auditor – we noted the
results of the audits with approval. We determined that, also based on the final results of our inspections, there are no
objections to be raised.

Today, we approved the Annual Financial Statements and Consolidated Financial Statements prepared by the
Management Board. The Annual Financial Statements are thus established. We agree to the Management Board’s
proposal for the appropriation of distributable profit.


Personnel issues
As elected substitute member, Mr. Stefan Viertel became a member of our Supervisory Board effective as of January 1,
2021. He replaced Mr. Stephan Szukalski, who had resigned from his mandate effective at the end of 2020. On May 27,
2021, the General Meeting elected Mr. Frank Witter as member of the Supervisory Board for a term of office of four years, in
accordance with our proposal. Mr. Frank Witter replaced Mr. Alexander Schütz, who had resigned from his Supervisory
Board membership with effect from the end of the General Meeting 2021. On the employee representatives’ side, Mr. Frank
Bsirske also resigned from his office and left the Supervisory Board effective October 27, 2021. On November 25, 2021, Mr.
Frank Werneke was appointed by the court to take the place of Mr. Frank Bsirske.

With effect from the end of April 30, 2021, Mr. Frank Kuhnke resigned from his Management Board mandate and left
Deutsche Bank. Based on the recommendation of the Nomination Committee, we appointed Ms. Rebecca Short as
member of the Management Board for three years with effect from May 1, 2021. We appointed Mr. Olivier Vigneron as
member of the Management Board with the functional responsibility of Chief Risk Officer for a period of three years with
effect from May 20, 2022. To ensure an orderly transition in this position, Mr. Vigneron joins the bank as
General Manager (Generalbevollmächtigter) with effect from March 1, 2022. Furthermore, at our extraordinary meeting on
March 29, 2021, we resolved to extend Mr. Christian Sewing’s appointment as member and Chairman of the Management
Board until the end of April 2026, and at our meeting on December 16, 2021, to extend Mr. Fabrizio Campelli’s Management
Board appointment by three years, from November 1, 2022, until the end of October 2025. Both resolutions were based on
the recommendations of the Nomination Committee and the Chairman’s Committee.

We thank the members of the Management Board and the Supervisory Board who left last year for their dedicated work
and their constructive assistance to the company during the past years.

We would also like to thank the bank’s employees for their great personal dedication.

Frankfurt am Main, March 10, 2022 (amended on April 7, 2022)

The Supervisory Board




Dr. Paul Achleitner

Chairman


                                                                                                                        XIII
Deutsche Bank                         Deutsche Bank
                                      Supervisory     Group
                                                  Board
Annual Report 2021




Supervisory Board
Dr. Paul Achleitner             Timo Heider*                  Stefan Viertel*
– Chairman                      Emmerthal                     Kelkheim im Taunus
Munich                          Germany                       Germany
Germany

                                Martina Klee*                 Dr. Theodor Weimer
Detlef Polaschek*               Frankfurt am Main             Wiesbaden
– Deputy Chairman               Germany                       Germany
Essen
Germany
                                Henriette Mark*               Frank Werneke*
                                Munich                        since November 25, 2021
Ludwig Blomeyer-­               Germany                       Berlin
Bartenstein*                                                  Germany
Bremen
Germany                         Gabriele Platscher*
                                Braunschweig                  Prof. Dr. Norbert
                                Germany                       Winkeljohann
Frank Bsirske*                                                Osnabrück
until October 27, 2021                                        Germany
Isernhagen                      Bernd Rose*
Germany                         Menden
                                Germany                       Frank Witter
                                                              since May 27, 2021
Mayree Clark                                                  Braunschweig
New Canaan                      Gerd Alexander Schütz         Germany
USA                             until May 27, 2021
                                Vienna
                                Austria
Jan Duscheck*
Berlin
Germany                         John Alexander Thain
                                Rye
                                USA
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck
Cupertino
USA                             Michele Trogni
                                Riverside
                                USA
Sigmar Gabriel
Goslar
Germany                         Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel
                                Madrid
                                Spain




   * Employee representatives                                                           XIV
Deutsche Bank                         Committees
Annual Report 2021




Committees
Chairman’s Committee             Audit Committee                  Integrity Committee
Dr. Paul Achl eitner             Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann   Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel
– Chairman                      – Chairman                      – Chairperson
Frank Bsirske*                   Dr. Paul Achl eitner             Dr. Paul Achleitner
(until September 26, 2021)
                                 Henriette Mark*                  Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein*
Detlef Polaschek*
                                 Gabriele Platscher*              Sigmar Gabriel
Frank Werneke*
(since December 16, 2021)        Detlef Polaschek*                Timo Heider*

Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann   Bernd Rose*                      Gabriele Platscher*
                                 Dr. Dagmer Valcárcel
                                 Stefan Viertel*                  Compensation Control
Nomination Committee             (since July 29, 2021)
                                                                  Committee
Mayree Clark                     Dr. Theodor Weimer
– Chairperson                                                    Dr. Paul Achl eitner
                                 Frank Witter                     – Chairman
Dr. Paul Achl eitner             (since July 29, 2021)
                                                                  Frank Bsirske*
Frank Bsirske*                                                    (until September 26, 2021)
(until September 26, 2021)
                                 Risk Committee                   Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck
Detlef Polaschek*                                                 (since February 3, 2021)
Gerd Alexander Schütz            Mayree Clark
                                 – Chairperson                   Detlef Polaschek*
(until January 28, 2021)
                                 Dr. Paul Achl eitner             Bernd Rose*
Frank Werneke*
(since December 16, 2021)        Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein*     Gerd Alexander Schütz
                                                                  (until February 1, 2021)
Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann   Jan Duscheck*
(since February 3, 2021)                                          Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel
                                 Michele Trogni
                                                                  Frank Werneke*
                                 Stefan Viertel*                  (since December 16, 2021)
                                 Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann




   * Employee representatives                                                                    XV
Deutsche Bank                        Deutsche Bank Group
                                     Committees
Annual Report 2021




Strategy Committee              Technology, Data and
John Al exander Thain           ­Innovation Committee
– Chairman                     Michele Trogni
Dr. Paul Achl eitner            – Chairperson

Frank Bsirske*                  Dr. Paul Achl eitner
(until September 26, 2021)      Jan Duscheck*
Mayree Clark                    Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck
Timo Heider*                    Timo Heider
Henriette Mark*                 (since July 29, 2021)

Detlef Polaschek*               Martina Kl ee*

Michele Trogni                  Bernd Rose*

Frank Werneke*                  Frank Witter
(since December 16, 2021)       (since July 29, 2021)



                                Mediation Committee
                                Dr. Paul Achl eitner
                                – Chairman
                                Frank Bsirske*
                                (until September 26, 2021)
                                Detlef Polaschek*
                                Frank Werneke*
                                (since December 16, 2021)
                                Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann




   * Employee representatives                                    XVI
Deutsche Bank                                     Strategy
Annual Report 2021




Strategy
In July 2019, we embarked on a fundamental transformation of Deutsche Bank. Since then we made substantial progress on
our key commitments. We have redrawn our business perimeter and selectively exited businesses in which we were not able
to compete profitably. The focused execution of our strategic agenda is helping us to deliver against our financial targets and
milestones. We have achieved revenue and volume growth across all four core businesses, with business momentum, market
share gains and investments supporting performance heading into 2022. Throughout the uncertainty of the COVID-19
pandemic we have increased our client interactions and supported them in navigating their challenges. As we ended the year
2021 we absorbed 97 % of our anticipated transformation related costs. This progress has been recognized externally by our
stakeholders. Notably in 2021, Deutsche Bank received rating upgrades from Moody’s, S&P and Fitch.

Our competitive position is built on our business capabilities in lending, investing, payments, risk management and capital
markets intermediation with a global reach and on the stability of the German home market. Strength and stability are expected
to become important as the next decade could see unprecedented market changes in the banking industry. Significant shifts
in the macro environment, the transition of economies to net zero emissions and advances in technology will define our
operating environment. In this volatile world, client demands are expected to grow in particular for advisory services, for ESG
related transaction support and for risk management.

Our ambition is for Deutsche Bank to become the first point of call for all our clients, addressing the full range of their financial
needs, as their Global Hausbank. Our global network, our more than 20,000 account managers worldwide, our market
expertise, our comprehensive product range and our outstanding risk management should place us to be a leading Global
Hausbank based in Europe. Positive client momentum and profitable growth are validating our direction. We help our clients
navigate a complex environment by hedging their risks, financing their transformation, and facilitating investments that allow
them to offset the negative impact of inflation and protect their assets. Looking ahead this sets us up for the next phase of our
evolution which aims to focus on becoming sustainably profitable by further growing our businesses while increas ing
efficiencies and maintaining capital discipline.

Our future growth aspirations are centered around stable and sustainable businesses. Targeted growth initiatives have been
identified in the Corporate Bank, the Private Bank, primarily in the International Private Bank, and in Asset Management. For
the Investment Bank our focus will remain a consistent and disciplined execution of our strategy.

These growth ambitions will be combined with a continued focus on costs. To reshape and improve our long-term competitive
position, we will remain disciplined and create further capacity for future investments. We plan to reinvest cost savings into
targeted growth initiatives and further efficiency measures.

Both our growth targets and our focus on efficiency are intended to allow us to return capital to our shareholders. We remain
committed to employing the same discipline we used in the last phase of the transformation to balance investment into
business growth and return capital. To enhance the return on the tangible equity profile of the Group, we aim to re-allocate
capital to higher yielding and higher growth businesses within our portfolio.

We are committed to delivering sustainably growing cash dividends and returning excess capital to shareholders through
share buybacks that is over and above what is required to support profitable growth and upcoming regulatory changes over
time, subject to regulatory approval and shareholder authorization and meeting German corporate law requirements. To that
end, subject to meeting our strategic targets, the Management Board intends to grow the cash dividend per share by 50 %
p.a. in the next 3 years, starting from € 0.20 per share for the financial year 2021, which would translate into approximately €
3.3 billion of cumulative dividend payments by 2025 with respect to financial years 2021-2024. In relation to the financial year
2024 we intend to achieve a total payout ratio of 50 % from a combination of dividends paid and share buybacks executed in
2025; and we intend to maintain a 50 % total payout ratio in subsequent years. In addition to the already announced share
buyback in 2022 of € 0.3 billion, meeting our current financial aspirations would therefore support the previously announced
cumulative distributions to shareholders in the form of dividends paid or share buybacks executed in the total amount of € 5
billion in respect of financial years 2021-2024. In addition, should we successfully execute our financial and strategic plans
through 2025, total implied cumulative distributions of approximately € 8 billion in respect of financial years 2021-2025 would
be achievable. Our ambition to return capital to shareholders is further underpinned by our aim to maintain a robust Common
Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital ratio of approximately 13 %, i.e. a CET 1 ratio of no less than 200 basis points above our
Maximum Distributable Amount (MDA) threshold we currently assume to prevail over time.

In our aspiration of supporting our client franchise we continue to emphasize strong controls and transform the way we work.
To achieve this we will balance growth ambitions with a robust control mindset, we plan to continue to strengthen systems
and processes and we will invest in deploying modern technology. Likewise, we will continue our transition to become more
agile.




                                                                                                                                XVII
Deutsche Bank                                   Strategy
Annual Report 2021




Our Financial Results in 2021
Sustaining revenue growth in our Core Bank

Our strategic transformation was designed to refocus our Core Bank around market leading businesses, which operate in
growing markets with attractive return potential. Our Core Bank comprises our four core operating divisions, namely the
Corporate Bank, the Investment Bank, the Private Bank, and Asset Management, together with the segment Corporate &
Other. Revenues in our Core Bank were € 25.4 billion in 2021, with € 25.4 billion on Group level, a year-on-year increase of
5 % and 6 %, respectively.

Continuing to deliver on cost reduction targets

We remained highly focused on cost reductions in 2021. Noninterest expenses were € 21.5 billion in 2021, a slight year-over-
year increase of € 0.3 billion or 1.4 %. As the transformation advances, our cost/ income ratio has substantially improved since
2019, down 24 percentage points. Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges and expenses eligible for reimbursement
related to Prime Finance were € 19.3 billion, a year-over-year reduction of € 0.3 billion or 1.3 %, with lower compensation and
benefits reflecting reductions in the workforce and offsetting performance driven adjustments to variable compensation and
slight increase in IT costs mainly driven by investment spending and execution of our IT and platform strategies.

Continued portfolio and cost reduction and completion of Prime Finance transfer in the Capital
Release Unit

The Capital Release Unit delivered another year of significant portfolio reduction while further reducing costs in 2021. The
transfer of clients, technology and key staff from Deutsche Bank’s Global Prime Finance and Electronic Equities businesses
to BNP Paribas was successfully completed by the end of 2021, meeting the targeted timeline.

At year-end 2021, risk weighted assets (RWAs) were reduced to € 28 billion, down from € 34 billion at the end of 2020 and
ahead of Deutsche Bank’s year end 2022 target of € 32 billion. As at December 31, 2021, the Unit’s RWAs included
Operational Risk RWAs of € 20 billion. Leverage exposure was € 39 billion at the end of 2021, down 46 % from € 72 billion at
the end of 2020, already ahead of our target of € 51 billion for 2022.

Since its inception in mid-2019, the Capital Release Unit has reduced RWAs by 57 %, or € 37 billion, and leverage exposure
by 84 %, or € 210 billion.

The Capital Release Unit reported a substantial improvement in its financial results in 2021. The loss before tax was € 1.4
billion, down 38 % from a loss before tax of € 2.2 billion in 2020. This improvement was primarily driven by a 26 % reduction
in noninterest expenses, reflecting a 35 % reduction in adjusted costs ex-transformation charges during the year.

Conservative balance sheet management
We remain committed to managing our balance sheet conservatively as we execute on our strategic transformation and
navigate through the COVID-19 pandemic and the situation related to the Russian military action against the Ukraine. At the
end of 2021, our CET1 ratio was 13.2 %, 42 basis points lower compared to year-end 2020 and 280 basis points above the
regulatory CET1 requirements. For 2022, we remain committed to maintaining our CET1 ratio above 12.5 %.

Leverage ratio (fully loaded) was 4.9 % at the end of the 2021, positively impacted by the CRR amendments which took effect
on June 28, 2021 and the ECB’s Decision 2021/1074. In aggregate, these effects allow banks to temporarily exclude certain
eligible central bank exposures until March 2022 hence continuing the exclusion which was temporarily introduced by the CRR
Quick Fix in the third quarter of 2020. Including these balances, our Leverage ratio (fully loaded) was 4.5 %.

Value-at-Risk (VaR) amounted to € 34 million at the end of 2021 confirming our conservative risk levels.

Provisions for credit losses were € 515 million for the full year 2021, significantly lower compared to 2020. For the full year
2022, we expect provisions for credit losses to be around 20 basis points as a percentage of our anticipated average loans.
This reflects the expectations of a slowdown of macro-economic growth in 2022 from the exceptionally strong levels in 2021.
We remain committed to our stringent underwriting standards and our tight risk management framework. Further detail on the
calculation of Expected Credit Losses (ECLs) is provided in the section ‘Risk Report’ in this report.




                                                                                                                          XVIII
Deutsche Bank                                      Strategy
Annual Report 2021




Our Sustainability strategy

Since 2019, sustainability has been a central component of our “Compete to win” strategy. In 2021, we made progress in
implementing our sustainability strategy, focusing on the following four dimensions:

– Sustainable Finance. It is our objective to be a reliable financial partner for our clients and to support them in their transition.
– Policies and commitments: To ensure that the business we do is ESG-compliant and avoids negative impacts.
– People and Operations: To be the partner of choice, we also have to lead by example. It means ensuring that we ourselves
  operate in a sustainable way and that we foster a culture of diversity and inclusion.
– Thought Leadership and Stakeholder Engagement. We need to engage with lawmakers, regulators, investors, and society
  as a whole in order to agree on the right standards and frameworks to maximize our positive impact.

One of the main drivers for this progress is the bank’s governance to manage, measure and control its sustainability activities.
This governance includes two executive-level forums devoted entirely to sustainability. The most senior forum is the Group
Sustainability Committee. Chaired by our Chief Executive Officer, the committee’s role is to accelerate decision-making and
ensure senior management alignment across the Group. To reinforce the bank’s sustainability ambition, the Management
Board’s, and other top-executives’ variable compensation has been tied to additional non-financial sustainability objectives
from 2021, such as volumes for sustainable financing and investments, a reduction of electricity consumption in the bank’s
buildings and a sustainability rating index comprising the following rating agencies: CDP, ISS ESG, MSCI ESG Ratings, S&P
Global, and Sustainalytics.

Given the progress we have been making in sustainable finance, we first announced to bring forward our € 200 billion target
for sustainable financing and investments by two years to year-end of 2023 and now expect to achieve it by year-end 2022.
We exceeded our 2021 target of € 100 billion after nine months and ended the year with € 157 billion in sustainable financing
and investments.

We also continued to work on the implementation of further focus areas of our sustainability strategy. In 2021, we continued
to develop and implement a comprehensive Climate Risk Framework, in line with the recommendations of the Task Force for
Climate-Related Financial Disclosures. We became a founding member of the Net Zero Banking Alliance, committing to align
our operational and attributable emissions from our loan portfolio with pathways to net zero by 2050. This supplements the
bank’s signing of the Collective Commitment to Climate Action of the German financial sector and our commitment to publish
the carbon footprint of our loan portfolio by the end of 2022. Next to our engagement in the Net-Zero Banking Alliance we
started transition dialogues to support our clients in accelerating their sustainability transition and develop credible transition
plans.

In line with our ambition to put sustainability at the center of our operations, we remained carbon neutral for our own opera tions
and business travel, as we have been since 2012 and further implemented our commitment to source 100 % renewable
electricity by 2025, with an interim target of 85 % for 2022.

To demonstrate thought leadership and actively engage in dialogue, we laid our strategy at our first Sustainability Deep Dive
in May 2021. Furthermore, a Deutsche Bank delegation engaged with clients and other stakeholders on sustainability issues
at COP 26, which was held in Glasgow, Scotland. We also established an ESG Centre of Excellence in cooperation with the
Monetary Authority of Singapore and funded a chair for Sustainable Finance in the newly created Sustainable Business
Transformation Initiative at the European School of Management and Technology Berlin.

With our holistic sustainability approach, we aim to maximize our contribution to the Paris Climate Agreement and the United
Nations' Sustainable Development Goals. Several ESG rating agencies have recognized our sustainability progress: CDP has
raised the bank’s climate change score from C to B; credit ratings agency S&P Global scored Deutsche Bank 60 points (S&P
Global CSA assessment), putting it back in the Dow Jones Sustainability Europe Index, and our Sustainalytics score improved
from 30.0 (high risk) to 27.4 (medium risk).




                                                                                                                                 XIX
Deutsche Bank                                   Strategy
Annual Report 2021




Our Financial Targets
Our key financial targets are:

Financial Targets for 2022

–   Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity of 8 % for the Group
–   Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity of more than 9 % for the Core Bank
–   Cost income ratio of 70 %
–   Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio of above 12.5 %
–   Leverage ratio (fully loaded) of ~4.5 %

Financial Targets for 2025

– Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity of above 10 % for the Group
– Compounded annual growth rate of revenues from 2021 to 2025 of 3.5 to 4.5 %
– Cost income ratio of less than 62.5 %

The COVID-19 pandemic and its remaining impact on the global economy as well as the Russian military action against the
Ukraine may affect our ability to meet our financial targets, as its ultimate impact remains impossible to predict.

Until the first quarter of 2021, the Group had included an additional target for adjusted costs excluding transformation charges
in 2022 of € 16.7 billion. Since we adopted our transformation program in 2019, significant progress has been made by the
Group, and consequently our goal of achieving sustainable profitability is closer. Given the variability of revenue growth as
macroeconomic forces accelerate or slow our progress, in the second quarter 2021 we announced that we believe it is more
appropriate to focus on a relative measure of costs in targeting a strong and sustainable margin. Therefore as of the second
quarter of 2021, management measures the Group’s cost efficiency using the cost/income ratio (CIR). The primary cost target
for the Group is the CIR and a quantitative absolute cost target will no longer be published.

Adjusted costs, adjusted costs excluding transformation charges, Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity as well as
Leverage ratio (fully loaded) are non-GAAP financial measures. Please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-
GAAP Financial Measures” of this report for the definitions of such measures and reconciliations to the IFRS measures on
which they are based.


Our Businesses
This section should be read in conjunction with the section Deutsche Bank: Our Organization in the Operating and Financial
Review in the Annual Report 2021.

Corporate Bank

Corporate banking is an integral part of our business. Firstly, our capabilities in Cash Management, Trade Finance and
Lending, as well as Foreign Exchange, the latter delivered in close collaboration with the Investment Bank, enable us to serve
core needs of our corporate clients. As a leading bank serving multinational and German corporates domestically and abroad,
we help clients in optimizing their working capital and liquidity, securing global supply chains and distribution channels an d
managing their risks. Secondly, we act as a specialized provider of services to Financial Institutions, offering Correspondent
Banking, Trust and Agency and Securities Services. Finally, we provide business banking services to approximately 800,000
clients in Germany, covering small corporates and entrepreneur clients and offering a largely standardized product suite.

We have defined a number of specific initiatives to capitalize on our core competencies across these different areas and grow
our revenues to achieve our targets.

In 2021, the Corporate Bank continued to make progress on its strategic objectives. By the end of the year we generated €
364 million of revenues from deposit re-pricing, bringing the total amount of deposits under charging agreements to € 101
billion. We continued growing our business with platforms, FinTechs and eCommerce payment providers with new mandates
and clients. We launched our first Merchant Solutions products and started collaborating on our joint venture with Fiserv, a
leading global provider of payments and financial services technology, announced in the second quarter of 2021. In the third
quarter of 2021, we acquired Better Payment Germany GmbH, a payment service provider based in Berlin to expand our
product range and increase market share in payment processing and acceptance. Finally, we have focused on continuously
scaling-up the ESG-related transition dialogue with our clients and our engagements with external ESG stakeholders in various
industry initiatives.



                                                                                                                            XX
Deutsche Bank                                    Strategy
Annual Report 2021




We continue working towards our strategic ambitions. Firstly, we intend to re-price further deposits, both in our Cash
Management franchise and with domestic German corporate clients, in order to offset the impact of negative interest rates in
Europe. Implementation of deposit charging agreements is materially within our control and relies on our disciplined execution
as evidenced by our progress to date. We also aim to offer a full suite of advisory and financing solutions for corporate
treasurers. We intend to continue to expand our lending proposition with corporate clients across all regions. Building on 2021
achievements, our initiatives also include further growth of our business with platforms, FinTechs and eCommerce payment
providers. Parts of corporate banking, especially payments, are experiencing a high degree of innovation and disruption driven
by high-paced technology developments and the emergence of new competitors. In 2022, we expect to benefit from our
targeted investments in new growth areas, including Merchant Solutions and Asset as a Service, and where we see market
opportunity and believe to have a competitive advantage. As we grow our business with clients globally, we commit to applying
sound risk management principles in order to maintain the high quality of our loan portfolio and strict lending standards.

We also aim to further advance our provision of sustainable financing solutions for our clients. In 2021, we expanded our
sustainable finance product offering via inclusion of sustainability factors in cash management and supply chain finance
products, established ongoing knowledge-sharing formats and continued to address ESG topics in client dialogue.
Furthermore, we also began developing scalable ESG solutions for our Business Banking clients that we expect to introduce
in 2022.

Looking ahead, we expect the Corporate Bank to act as an integral part of our Global Hausbank. We see growth opportunities
across all of our core client groups (Corporate, Institutional, Business Banking) from existing CB strengths and new products.
Equally we see further potential to reduce our cost base from technology and front-to-back process optimization, as well as
automation and location strategy.

Initiatives will target revenue growth with corporate clients across cash management and payments, growing our fee-based
business with institutional clients and expand lending. Our ambition is to become a leader in ESG and drive the transition to a
sustainable economy by supporting our corporate clients globally. Additionally we expect that our investments into new
products enabling new business models of the real economy, like merchant solutions and Assets-as-a-Service, will contribute
to future sustainable growth.

Investment Bank

The Investment Bank (IB) remains core to our business. Across Origination and Advisory (O&A) and Fixed Income and Sales
and Trading (FIC), corporate and institutional clients are able to access a comprehensive range of services, encompassing
advisory, debt and equity issuance, financing, market making / liquidity provision and risk management solutions. The division
regionally encompasses EMEA, Americas and APAC, with a strategy that is focused upon operating in areas of competitive
strength.

In 2021, the Investment Bank (IB) continued with the implementation of the strategy outlined in our Investor presentations in
2019 and 2020. The key priorities of delivering sustainable revenue growth; client franchise improvements; and reduction of
the cost base are unchanged. In each of these areas the IB successfully delivered tangible results. Eight quarters of year-on-
year revenue growth in O&A, continued strength across our financing business and the targeted transformation of our FIC
Flow platform resulted in 4 % revenue growth versus a strong 2020. This reflected the strength of the client franchise; in O&A
we grew our market share with our priority clients by 110 basis points (Source: Dealogic), whilst in FIC our institutional client
group saw a 17 % increase in client revenue credits versus 2019. Our new client coverage model in EMEA, combined with
investment into our flow business also contributed to gains in market share in our electronic franchise across Rates products,
Credit bonds and FX businesses. Clients recognize the strength of our offering and turn to us for a full range of risk
management services, increasingly encompassing ESG related activity

The successful execution of the IB’s strategy since 2019 has created a well-positioned business. Our unique platform focuses
on areas of competitive strength and we are able to demonstrate the benefit of businesses that operate across the value chain.
The Investment Bank aims to remain consistent and disciplined in its strategy execution. This will allow us to defend and
consolidate our strong market position. We expect to maintain the level of client intensity along with focused investments into
growth of specific areas of the business. Within our Fixed Income franchise, further enhancements will be made to our flow
businesses, expansion of our financing capability and the development of technology-led innovative client solutions as part of
our risk management offering. Within O&A, targeted investment will be made through pursuing growth opportunities via
investment into the coverage of key targeted sectors with a focus upon building our Mergers & Acquisitions business.

Finally, ESG remains a priority across all our business lines. We are top 5 ranked origination house for debt related ESG
products (Source: Dealogic) and have developed a number of market-first funding and investment solutions for clients. In
2021, we partnered with several global clients to support their issuance of Sustainability Linked Bonds, helping them raise
well over € 150 billion of funding in sustainable bond instruments. Deutsche Bank acted as joint bookrunner on the inaugural
€ 12 billion green bond transaction issued under the EU’s Next Generation program.




                                                                                                                            XXI
Deutsche Bank                                    Strategy
Annual Report 2021




Private Bank

Private Bank (PB), operating through the two distinct business units of Private Bank Germany (PB GY) and the International
Private Bank (IPB), covers private, wealth and commercial clients across more than 60 countries.

PB GY is Germany’s leading retail bank with two complementary brands, Deutsche Bank and Postbank. We target clients
seeking advisory solutions with Deutsche Bank offerings and those looking for convenience through the Postbank offerings.
In cooperation with Deutsche Post DHL AG, we also offer postal and parcel services in the Postbank branches. Within PB
GY, the transformation is well on track. In 2021, we successfully continued our strategic initiatives and grew our operating
business, specifically in investment and lending products. Going forward, PB GY plans to conclude the consolidation of
Deutsche Bank and Postbank IT infrastructure and to realize efficiencies in operations. We also aim to further optimize our
distribution network by reducing the branch network and self-service infrastructure. We intend to invest into data-enabled sales
channels and B2B2C growth strategies while strengthening our consumer finance business. At the same time we aim to build
on our market-leading advisory proposition to drive growth in Insurance and Investment products. To meet the changing
advisory-demands of our clients, PB GY is implementing new branch formats and remote banking facilities. In order to support
the growing demand for ESG compliant products and respective advisory, a dedicated sustainability-focused branch format
will be rolled out further.

The IPB has a diversified business mix. Our core scalable business is in continental Europe but we also have a fast growing
presence in Asia and the Middle East and we operate a specialized ultra-high-net-worth (U/HNW) franchise in the United
States. Under IPB’s Personal Banking segment, we serve around three million clients, primarily in Italy and Spain. IPB’s vision
is to be the house of choice for family entrepreneurs globally. Our approach to holistically cover these clients’ private and
commercial needs with a one stop solution is a competitive differentiator. We have launched the dedicated “Bank for
Entrepreneurs” proposition in 2021 in Italy and Spain and look to extend it to further markets in the future. An important element
of this strategy is for IPB to be a preferred investment partner for sophisticated U/HNW families globally. In 2021, we have
significantly invested to strengthen our relationship coverage and product capabilities to capture the attractive growth
opportunities in this segment. Adding to this strategy is our plan to become a Premium Bank for Affluent clients. We are
transforming our Personal Banking franchise towards a model that is tailored towards the needs of the affluent segment. In a
first step, we signed an agreement to sell Deutsche Bank Financial Advisors network and continued to optimize our branch
network in 2021. We will continue to invest in our product capabilities, key markets, digitization and completing the
transformation of our Personal Banking franchise through optimizing our network and channel capabilities.

In 2021, the Private Bank continued to build on the sustainability foundations laid in the previous year, through the development
of a framework for classification of investment products (complementing the Group-level Sustainable Finance Framework
published in 2020). At the first Sustainability Deep Dive in May 2021, the division committed to provide their private, wealth
and commercial clients with suitable ESG-compliant financial products and solutions.

Asset Management

We are a leading asset manager with € 928 billion in assets under management as of December 31, 2021. With approximately
4,200 employees operating globally, we provide a range of traditional and alternative investment capabilities to clients
worldwide. Our investment offerings span all major asset classes including equity, fixed income, cash and multi asset as well
as alternative and passive investments. Our product offerings are distributed through our global distribution network, while
also leveraging third party distribution channels. We serve a diverse base of retail and institutional investors worldwide, with
a strong presence in our home market in Germany. Our clients include government institutions, corporations and foundations
as well as millions of individual investors.

The asset management industry is evolving, with intensified competition, continued margin pressure, and technological
disruption amid heightened geopolitical tensions and increased market volatility. However, we believe our diverse range of
high-quality products and investment solutions provides us with a strong basis for growing assets and profitability - regardless
of the market in which we operate. Since our initial public offering (IPO) in March 2018, we have focused on a strategic and
organizational refinement, improving net flows and increased efficiency. We prioritized the adjusted cost-income ratio target
within the first phase of our corporate journey to ensure that we are able to generate maximum shareholder value regardless
of the environment in which we operate. Entering the second phase of our corporate journey, we intend to focus on our
ambitions to transform, grow and lead in order to become a leading European asset manager with global reach.

Firstly, as part of our transformation ambition, we aim to adapt the way we work to meet the industry challenges of the decade
ahead of us. We want to achieve this by recalibrating our core platform and policy framework so that these are tailored to
DWS’s fiduciary business and clients. We are also investing in new technology and, following the launch of our Functional
Role Framework, we are further strengthening the culture of our organization. Secondly, our ambition to grow concentrates
on delivering focused product strategies in targeted growth markets, expanding our range of sustainable investment solutions
and leveraging existing partnerships to capture new client opportunities, especially in Asia Pacific where we see strong growth.
In addition, we will seek to play an active role in mergers and acquisitions (M&A). We will monitor the market for selective bolt-


                                                                                                                             XXII
Deutsche Bank                                    Strategy
Annual Report 2021




on opportunities to grow in priority areas as well as transformational opportunities in order to participate in the continued
consolidation we expect in the asset management industry. Thirdly, it is our ambition to achieve differentiated leadership
across ESG, passive and high margin investments and solutions. By delivering on these ambitions, we can reach our overall
goal of becoming a leading European asset manager with global reach.

At the start of 2021, DWS refined the medium-term financial targets for 2024 as part of a broader review of priorities and
initiatives. These targets are a sustainable, adjusted cost-income ratio of 60 % and a net flow rate of greater than 4 % of the
beginning of the period assets under management on average over the medium term.

In 2021, we continued to increase our focus on the targeted asset classes of Passive, Active Multi-Asset and Alternatives. As
part of our regional strategy, we aim to focus on developing and nurturing strategic partnerships which have been a driver of
our strong market position in Germany and in Europe. In Asia, we are continuing to deepen the relationships with our partners
Nippon Life and Harvest Fund Management and we are exploring new business opportunities in the region. We entered a
long-term strategic partnership with BlackFin Capital Partners in the second half of 2021 to jointly evolve the digital investment
platform into a platform ecosystem. Our aspiration is to deliver a best-in-class client experience and service. Our growth
commitment into technology is further underlined by the acquisition of a minority stake in UK-based retirement technology
company Smart Pension Limited.

Increasingly, governments and businesses around the globe have set ambitious targets in contributing towards a global net
zero economy by 2050. DWS aims to become climate-neutral in its actions, in line with the Paris Agreement, by 2050 or
sooner. Building on this long-term ambition and our signatory to the Net Zero Asset Managers Initiative (NZAM), climate action
is a focus theme within our global sustainability strategy.

As we look to extend our view towards 2025 we intend to further grow our Asset Management franchise by building on platform
scale with organic and inorganic opportunities - acquiring complementary strengths, distribution access and enlarging our
geographical footprint. The strong underlying trend of assets shifting to Passive and to Alternatives provides areas for growth
in several parts of our business. Delivery of our ESG capabilities to clients and further embedding ESG into the corporate
DNA of DWS will be key to support our growth.




                                                                                                                            XXIII
1
Combined
Management Report




2     Operating and Financial Review
2     Executive Summary
5     Deutsche Bank Group
10    Results of Operations
29    Financial Position
31    Liquidity and Capital Resources
34    Outlook
41    Risks and Opportunities
54    Risk Report
56    Risk and Capital Overview
59    Risk and Capital Framework
68    Risk and Capital Management
118   Risk and Capital Performance
171   Sustainability
173   Employees
177   Internal Control over Financial Reporting
179	Information pursuant to Section 315a (1)
     of the German Commercial Code and
     Explanatory Report
182	Corporate Governance Statement pursuant
     to Sections 289f and 315d of the German
     Commercial Code
183	Standalone Parent Company
     information (HGB)
Deutsche Bank                                                         Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                    Executive Summary




Operating and Financial Review
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related
notes to them. Our Operating and Financial Review includes qualitative and quantitative disclosures on Segmental Results of
Operations and Entity Wide disclosures on Net Revenue Components as required by International Financial Reporting
Standard (IFRS) 8, “Operating Segments”. For additional Business Segment disclosure under IFRS 8 please refer to Note 4
“Business Segments and Related Information” of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Forward-looking statements are
disclosed in the Outlook section.



Executive Summary
The Global Economy
Economic growth (in %)¹                             2021²         2020³     Main driver
Global Economy                                        6.0           (3.1)   Global GDP growth in 2021 weakened slightly more than expected at the beginning of
                                                                            the year, largely due to a longer than anticipated drag from COVID-19 variants and
                                                                            supply chain disruptions. A partly disappointing performance in vaccine uptake and
                                                                            distribution somewhat dampened growth prospects while increasing inflation risk.
                                                                            Global GDP growth in 2021 is still the highest since the global financial crisis more than
                                                                            a decade ago even though various economies experienced remarkable fluctuations in
                                                                            recovery momentum.
    Of which:
    Developed countries                               5.1           (4.8)   Developed countries benefited from the early availability of COVID-19 vaccines in 2021.
                                                                            Fiscal policies continued supporting domestic demand, while industry sectors benefited
                                                                            from the global recovery. Central banks also maintained their expansive stance and
                                                                            complemented fiscal policy measures. Nevertheless, the recovery of developed
                                                                            countries was slowed down by global supply chain constraints.
    Emerging markets                                  6.6           (1.8)   The economic recovery in emerging markets was hampered by stop-go restrictions and
                                                                            vaccination pace. During the second half of 2021 inflation was driven by supply
                                                                            bottlenecks and higher energy prices.
Eurozone Economy                                      5.2           (6.5)   The Eurozone economies performed well especially after the wave of COVID-19
                                                                            infections resulting from the Delta variant. However, conditions deteriorated in the
                                                                            second half of 2021 as supply constraints became headwinds and the Eurozone almost
                                                                            stagnated in the last quarter of 2021. The European Central Bank continued its support
                                                                            and its fiscal policy remained expansive.
    Of which: German economy                          2.8           (4.6)   The German economy recovered during 2021 after the easing of COVID-19 related
                                                                            restrictions and private consumption gained significant momentum. The industry
                                                                            benefited from strong global trade but was unable to realize its recovery potential due to
                                                                            supply bottlenecks. Combined with temporary factors, the supply chain constraints and
                                                                            higher energy prices led to a significant increase in inflation. These factors contributed
                                                                            to a GDP contraction in the final quarter of 2021.
U.S. Economy                                          5.7           (3.4)   The U.S. economy recovered strongly in 2021. Massive fiscal stimulus, the introduction
                                                                            of vaccines and a strong labor market improvement supported domestic demand.
                                                                            However, persistent supply bottlenecks and the impact of COVID-19 constrained the
                                                                            recovery somewhat. Inflation picked up strongly during the year. The Federal Reserve's
                                                                            monetary policy remained expansionary.
Japanese Economy                                      1.7           (4.5)   The recovery of the Japanese economy in 2021 was slower in comparison to other
                                                                            developed countries and was weaker than expected at the beginning of 2021. This
                                                                            development was due to the prolonged COVID-19 impact, the government's stringent
                                                                            response to the pandemic and increasing supply shortages of semiconductors and
                                                                            other products. The Bank of Japan continued to maintain its accommodative stance.
Asian Economy4                                        7.1           (0.8)   Asia's economic recovery in 2021 was affected by weaker-than-expected GDP growth
                                                                            in a number of Asian economies and a more severe and prolonged COVID-19 impact.
                                                                            Over the course of 2021, growth performance became increasingly divergent, with the
                                                                            more advanced economies in Asia largely staying on their recovery path, while others
                                                                            faltered significantly.
    Of which: Chinese Economy                         8.1            2.2    China's economy experienced a dynamic start to 2021, with export demand being the
                                                                            main growth driver. As the year progressed, domestic demand was impacted by
                                                                            COVID-19 outbreaks and related measures, as well as strict enforcement of credit and
                                                                            regulatory discipline. The pressured real estate sector and energy shortages
                                                                            constrained the recovery.
1
    Annual Real GDP Growth (% YoY). Sources: National Authorities unless stated otherwise.
2
    Sources: Deutsche Bank Research.
3
    Some economic data for 2020 was revised by public statistics authorities due to the economic effects of the pandemic. As a result, this data may differ from that previously
    published.
4
    Includes China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam; excludes Japan.




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
Deutsche Bank                                                         Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                    Executive Summary




The Banking Industry
                                                                                                                                                          Dec 31, 2021
                                          Corporate         Retail        Corporate        Retail
Growth year-over-year (in %)               Lending        Lending          Deposits      Deposits      Main driver
Eurozone                                        3.1             4.0             8.1          5.0       Corporate loan growth has rebounded significantly in recent
                                                                                                       months also contributing to higher corporate deposits growth.
                                                                                                       Household deposits expanded at about pre-COVID-19 rate.
                                                                                                       Retail lending has accelerated further, driven by mortgages,
                                                                                                       and is now essentially the strongest of the past decade.
    Of which: Germany                           5.0             5.2             6.4          3.3       Corporate loan growth initially slowed in 2021, but advanced
                                                                                                       again substantially in recent months and is now close to the
                                                                                                       pre-crisis level. Retail lending growth already at the highest
                                                                                                       level on record a year ago, has picked up even further
                                                                                                       momentum, especially in mortgages until lately when it levelled
                                                                                                       off. Consumer loans continue to stagnate. Household deposits
                                                                                                       are expanding at the slowest pace since 2016. Corporate
                                                                                                       deposit growth has slowed down somewhat but remains
                                                                                                       elevated.
US                                              0.9             3.8           11.31         11.31      Corporate loans were down year-on-year, but they have
                                                                                                       stabilized in the last months. Household lending has recovered
                                                                                                       from contraction and is now back at solid pre-crisis growth
                                                                                                       dynamics. Although down from extraordinary highs, total
                                                                                                       deposit growth has been still vigorous, with double-digit rates.
China                                         10.5             12.5             6.1         10.6       Both corporate and retail lending have slowed moderately, yet
                                                                                                       growth rates remain in double digits. Deposit funding has also
                                                                                                       lost momentum, particularly on the corporate side where
                                                                                                       volumes are essentially rising the least since the beginning of
                                                                                                       the pandemic, even though percentage changes have been
                                                                                                       stable recently.
1
    Total US deposits as segment breakdown is not available.


2021 was an exceptional year for global Origination and Advisory (O&A). Total fees set a new record, far exceeding the
previous record from just a year ago, with an increase of 39 %. O&A earnings have almost doubled in the past decade on a
U.S. Dollar basis. In 2021, the fee pool reached new all-time highs across the major categories – Equity Origination, Debt
Origination and largest increase observed in Advisory. The Americas accounted for 60 % of the total fee pool, EMEA for 23 %
and APAC for 17 %. Volumes for Advisory (announced deals) as well as Equity Origination (record IPOs and follow-on
transactions) climbed to their highest level ever, while Debt Origination decreased from its 2020 record driven by normalization
of investment-grade corporate debt and government debt, though high-yield corporate bond issuance was the strongest ever.
Overall FIC revenue pools declined by approximately 16 %, with G10 FX and Rates retreating by over 20 %, Emerging Markets
declining by 10-15 % and Commodities (not part of DB product portfolio) was broadly flat year-on-year – all versus very strong
2020 performance. Financing products have outperformed, driven by a strong second half of 2021. Equities fee pool (again
not a material part of DB product portfolio) has estimated to have grown 25 % year on year, with derivative and structured
products the key drivers.


Deutsche Bank Performance
Deutsche Bank reported a profit before tax of € 3.4 billion and a net profit of € 2.5 billion for the full year 2021. Net profit
increased fourfold relative to 2020 and the best result in ten years was delivered. The businesses gained momentum and
market share during the year leading to revenue and profit growth across all four pillars of the Core Bank. The bank recognized
97 % of the total anticipated transformation-related effects as well as reduced loan loss provisions supported by strong balance
sheet and disciplined risk management. The transformation progress and financial performance in 2021 provides a strong
step-off point to complete the transformation journey and deliver on the bank’s financial objectives in 2022. Reduction of legacy
assets progressed faster than expected and the bank will resume capital distributions to shareholders. The bank announced
actions which would provide total capital distributions to shareholders of approximately € 700 million in 2022. The Management
Board has decided to initiate a share repurchase program of € 300 million, to be completed in the first half of 2022, and intends
to propose to the Annual General Meeting a cash dividend of € 0.20 per share for the financial year 2021.

Pre-tax profit was € 3.4 billion in 2021 after absorbing transformation charges of € 1.0 billion and restructuring and severance
expenses of € 470 million. The Core Bank, which excludes the Capital Release Unit, reported a pre-tax profit of € 4.8 billion
in 2021 versus € 3.2 billion in 2020. Adjusting for transformation charges of € 945 million, restructuring and severance
expenses of € 464 million and specific revenue items of negative € 74 million, pre-tax profit in the Core Bank would have been
€ 6.1 billion, up 46 % versus 2020 on a comparable basis.




                                                                                                                                                                         3
Deutsche Bank                                                     Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                Executive Summary




Revenues excluding specific items, Adjusted costs, Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges, Adjusted costs
excluding transformation charges and expenses eligible for reimbursement related to Prime Finance, Adjusted profit (loss)
before tax, Post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and Net Assets (adjusted) are non-GAAP financial
measures. Please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report for
the definitions of such measures and reconciliations to the IFRS measures on which they are based.

Group Key Performance Indicators
Near-term operating performance                                                                                         Status end of 2021             Status end of 2020
Group Post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity¹                                                                     3.8 %                         0.2 %
Core Bank Post-tax return on average tangible shareholders' equity2                                                                 6.4 %                         4.0 %
Cost income ratio3                                                                                                                 84.6 %                        88.3 %

Capital performance
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio4                                                                                                13.2 %                        13.6 %
Leverage ratio (fully loaded)4                                                                                                      4.9 %                         4.7 %
1
    Based on Net Income attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial
    Measures” of this report.
2
    Based on Core Bank Net Income attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP
    Financial Measures” of this report.
3
    Noninterest expenses as a percentage of total net revenues, which are defined as net interest income before provision for credit losses plus noninterest income.
4
    Further detail on the calculation of this ratio is provided in the Risk Report.


Net revenues for the Group were € 25.4 billion in 2021, an increase of € 1.4 billion, or 6 % compared to 2020. Net revenues
in the Core Bank increased by 5 % to € 25.4 billion. Net revenues in the Corporate Bank (CB) of € 5.2 billion remained flat
year-on-year as business volume growth and deposit repricing offset interest rate headwinds. Net revenues in the Investment
Bank (IB) increased by 4 % to € 9.6 billion in 2021, driven by significant increase in Origination & Advisory reflecting favorable
market conditions and record volume growth during the year while Fixed Income & Currencies (FIC) sales & trading remained
essentially flat. Full-year net revenues in the Private Bank (PB) were € 8.2 billion, up 1 % year-on-year reflecting revenue
growth in both Private Bank Germany and International Private Bank businesses as well as higher benefits from TLTRO that
more than offset the adverse impact of interest rate headwinds and of forgone revenues resulting from the German Federal
Court of Justice (BGH) ruling on customer consent for pricing changes on current accounts. Net revenues in Asset
Management (AM) of € 2.7 billion increased by 21 % compared to the prior year reflecting growth in management fees due to
improvements in equity market levels and seven consecutive quarters of net inflows as well as higher performance and
transaction fees including favorable effects from a multi-asset performance fee in 2021. Net revenues in the Capital Release
Unit (CRU) were € 26 million in 2021, versus negative € 225 million in the prior year, as revenues from Prime Finance cost
recovery and the loan portfolio were only partly offset by funding, risk management and de-risking impacts. Revenues in
Corporate and Other (C&O) were negative € 339 million compared to negative € 534 million in the prior year reflecting
favorable impact from valuation and timing differences driven by the positive mark-to-market impact from interest rate hedging
activities in connection with the bank’s funding arrangements.

Provision for credit losses was € 515 million in 2021, down 71 % versus 2020, reflecting a supportive credit environment, high
quality loan book and continued strict risk discipline against a backdrop of economic recovery due to the easing of COVID-19
restrictions during 2021. Provision for credit losses was 12 basis points of average loans, down from 41 basis points in 2020.

Noninterest expenses were € 21.5 billion in 2021, an increase of € 289 million or 1 %, from 2020. This includes transformation
charges of € 1.0 billion, up from € 490 million in 2020. By the end of 2021, 97 % of total transformation-related effects
anticipated through the end of 2022 were already recognized. Litigation expenses increased by € 308 million, partly offset by
a decline in restructuring and severance expenses by € 217 million. Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges and
expenses eligible for reimbursement related to Prime Finance were € 19.3 billion, down 1 % compared to the prior year. The
year-on-year decrease includes lower compensation costs reflecting the effects from workforce reductions of 1,690 full-time
equivalents in 2021, partially offset by an increase in variable compensation costs. Excluding the aforementioned
transformation charges and litigation, most expense categories within general and administrative expenses were lower or flat
compared to last year, reflecting ongoing disciplined cost management.

Income tax expense was € 880 million in 2021, compared to € 397 million in the prior year. The effective tax rate in 2021 was
26 %.

The Bank reported a net profit of € 2.5 billion in 2021, compared to € 624 million in 2020. The improvement was driven by the
aforementioned strong revenue performance across core businesses and reduced levels of provision for credit losses partly
offset by a slight increase in non-interest expenses as described above.

The Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital ratio was 13.2 % at the end of 2021, a decrease of 40 bps compared to 2020. The
leverage ratio improved from 4.7 % in 2020 to 4.9 % at the end of 2021 on a fully loaded basis. The leverage ratio on a phase-
in basis improved from 4.8 % in 2020 to 4.9 % in 2021.




                                                                                                                                                                            4
Deutsche Bank                                   Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                              Deutsche Bank Group




Deutsche Bank Group
Deutsche Bank: Our Organization
Headquartered in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Deutsche Bank is the largest bank in Germany and one of the largest financial
institutions in the world, as measured by total assets of € 1,324 billion as of December 31, 2021. As of that date, the bank had
82,969 full-time equivalent internal employees and operated in 58 countries with 1,709 branches, of which 67 % were located
in Germany. The bank offers a wide variety of investment, financial and related products and services to private individuals,
corporate entities and institutional clients around the world.

As of December 31, 2021, the bank was organized into the following segments:

–   Corporate Bank (CB)
–   Investment Bank (IB)
–   Private Bank (PB)
–   Asset Management (AM)
–   Capital Release Unit (CRU)
–   Corporate & Other (C&O)

We refer to CB, IB, PB, AM and C&O as the Core Bank.

In addition, Deutsche Bank has a country and regional organizational layer to facilitate a consistent implementation of global
strategies.

The bank has operations or dealings with existing and potential customers in most countries in the world. These operations
and dealings include working through:

– subsidiaries and branches;
– representative offices; and
– one or more representatives assigned to serve customers.

Capital expenditures or divestitures related to the divisions are included in the respective Corporate Division Overview.


Management Structure
The Management Board has structured the Group as a matrix organization, comprising Corporate Divisions and Infrastructure
Functions operating in legal entities and branches across geographic locations.

The Management Board is responsible for the management of the company in accordance with the law, the Articles of
Association and the Terms of Reference for the Management Board with the objective of creating sustainable value in the
interests of the company. It considers the interests of shareholders, employees and other company-related stakeholders. The
Management Board manages Deutsche Bank Group in accordance with uniform guidelines; it exercises general control over
all Group companies.

The Management Board decides on all matters prescribed by law and the Articles of Association and ensures compliance with
the legal requirements and internal guidelines (compliance). It also takes the necessary measures to ensure that adequate
internal guidelines are developed and implemented. The Management Board's responsibilities include, in particular, the bank’s
strategic management and direction, the allocation of resources, financial accounting and reporting, control and risk
management, as well as corporate control and a properly functioning business organization. The members of the Management
Board are collectively responsible for managing the bank’s business.

The allocation of functional responsibilities to the individual members of the Management Board is described in the Business
Allocation Plan for the Management Board, which sets the framework for the delegation of responsibilities to senior
management below the Management Board. The Management Board endorses individual accountability of senior position
holders as opposed to joint decision-taking in committees. At the same time, the Management Board recognizes the
importance of having comprehensive and robust information across all businesses in order to take well informed decisions
and established, the “Group Management Committee” which aims to improve the information flow across the corporate
divisions and between the corporate divisions and the Management Board along with the Infrastructure Committees, Business
Executive Committees and Regional Committees. The Group Management Committee is a senior platform, which is not
required by the German Stock Corporation Act, and is composed of all Management Board members, the most senior business
representatives to exchange information and discuss business, growth and profitability.



                                                                                                                              5
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Deutsche Bank Group




Corporate Bank

Corporate Division Overview
The Corporate Bank (CB) is primarily focused on serving corporate clients, including the German “Mittelstand”, larger and
smaller sized commercial and business banking clients in Germany as well as multinational companies. It is also a partner to
financial institutions with regards to certain Transaction Banking services.

Commencing from the first quarter of 2021, the Corporate Bank reports revenues based on three client categories: Institutional
Client Services, Corporate Treasury Services and Business Banking. Institutional Client Services comprises of Cash
Management for Institutional clients, Trust and Agency Services, as well as Securities Services. Corporate Treasury Services
provides the full suite of Trade Finance and Lending, as well as Corporate Cash Management for multinational and German
large and mid-sized corporate clients. Business Banking covers small corporates and entrepreneur clients in Germany and
offers a holistic, largely standardized product suite.

There have been no significant capital expenditures or divestitures since January 1, 2019.

Products and Services
The Corporate Bank is a global provider of risk management solutions, cash management, lending, trade finance, trust and
agency services as well as securities services. Focusing on the finance departments of corporate and commercial clients and
financial institutions in Germany and across the globe, our holistic expertise and global network allows us to offer integrated
solutions.

In addition to the Corporate Bank product suite, our Coverage teams provide clients with access to the expertise of the
Investment Bank.

Distribution Channels and Marketing
The global Coverage function of the Corporate Bank focuses on international large corporate clients and is organized into two
units: Coverage and Risk Management Solutions. Coverage includes multi-product generalists covering headquarter level and
subsidiaries via global, regional and local coverage teams. Risk Management Solutions includes Foreign Exchange, Emerging
Markets and Rates product specialists. This unit is managed regionally in APAC, Americas and EMEA to ensure close
connectivity to our clients.

Corporate clients in Germany are served out of two units: Corporate Treasury Services and Business Banking. Corporate
Treasury Services covers mid and large corporate clients across two brands, Deutsche Bank and Postbank, and offers the
whole range of solutions across cash, trade financing, lending and risk management for the corporate treasurer. Business
Banking covers small corporates and entrepreneur clients and offers a largely standardized product suite and selected
contextual-banking partner offerings (e.g. accounting solutions).

Investment Bank

Corporate Division Overview
The Investment Bank (IB) combines Deutsche Bank’s Fixed Income, Currency (FIC) Sales & Trading and, Origination &
Advisory, as well as Deutsche Bank Research. It focuses on its traditional strengths in financing, advisory, fixed income and
currencies, bringing together wholesale banking expertise across coverage, risk management, sales and trading, Investment
Banking and infrastructure. This enables IB to align resourcing and capital across our client and product perimeter to effectively
serve the Bank’s clients.

In IB we made one significant capital divestiture since January 1, 2019:

In April 2019, Tradeweb closed its initial public offering (IPO). Tradeweb is a financial services company that builds and
operates over-the-counter (OTC) marketplaces for trading fixed income products and derivatives. Deutsche Bank Group had
an economic interest in Tradeweb from 2007 and participated in the initial public offering and several subsequent secondary
offerings, alongside other large bank shareholders by selling a portion of its holdings.

There have been no significant capital expenditures since January 1, 2019.




                                                                                                                                6
Deutsche Bank                                   Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                              Deutsche Bank Group




Products and Services
FIC Sales & Trading brings together an institutional sales force, research, trading and structuring expertise across Foreign
Exchange, Rates, Emerging markets, Credit trading and Financing. The FIC Sales & Trading business operates globally and
provides both corporate and institutional clients liquidity and market making services and a range of specialized risk
management solutions across products, complemented by a comprehensive financing offering. The application of technology
and continued innovation of transaction lifecycle processes is enabling Deutsche Bank to respond to all client requirements,
increasing automation / electronification and regulatory requirements.

Origination and Advisory is responsible for our debt origination business, mergers and acquisitions (M&A), and a focused
equity advisory and origination platform. It is comprised of regional and industry-focused coverage teams, co-led from the
bank’s hubs in Europe, the U.S. and Asia Pacific, that facilitates the delivery of a range of financial products and services to
the bank’s corporate clients.

Distribution Channels and Marketing
Coverage of the IB’s clients is provided principally by three groups working in conjunction with each other: The Institutional
Client Group, which houses our debt sales team. Risk Management Solutions in the Corporate Bank, which covers capital
markets and Treasury solutions and Investment Banking Coverage within Origination & Advisory. The close cooperation
between these groups help to create enhanced synergies leading to increased cross selling of products/solutions to our clients.

Private Bank

Corporate Division Overview
Private Bank (PB) serves personal and private clients, wealthy individuals, entrepreneurs and families. The international
businesses also focus on commercial clients. PB is organized along two business divisions: Private Bank Germany and
International Private Bank.

PB was involved in the following significant capital divestitures since January 1, 2019:

In November 2020, Deutsche Bank AG signed an agreement to sell its share in Postbank Systems AG to Tata Consultancy
Services (TCS). The transaction was closed after regulatory and governmental approvals on December 31, 2020.

In August 2021, Deutsche Bank SpA signed an agreement to sell its financial advisors network in Italy (Deutsche Bank
Financial Advisors) to Zurich Italy. The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in 2022.

There have been no significant capital expenditures since January 1, 2019.

Products and Services
PB’s product range includes payment and account services, credit and deposit products as well as investment advice including
a range of Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) products, which enable their clients to invest in line with their values
and according to specified ESG strategies, scores and exclusionary criteria.

Private Bank Germany pursues a differentiated, customer-focused approach with two strong and complementary main brands:
Deutsche Bank and Postbank. With the Deutsche Bank brand, the division focuses on providing their private customers with
banking and financial products and services that include sophisticated and individual advisory solutions. The focus of Postbank
brand remains on providing their retail customers with standard products and daily retail banking services supported by direct
banking capabilities. In cooperation with Deutsche Post DHL AG, Private Bank Germany also offers postal and parcel services
in the Postbank brand branches.

International Private Bank also has a differentiated, customer-focused approach with two client segments. The IPB Personal
Banking client segment covers the retail and affluent customers as well as small businesses in Italy, Spain, Belgium and India,
providing them with banking and other financial services. The client segment Private Banking and Wealth Management covers
high-net-worth and ultra-high-net-worth clients globally as well as small and medium-sized corporate clients and private
banking clients in Italy, Spain, Belgium and India. The International Private Bank supports clients in planning, managing and
investing their wealth, financing their personal and business interests and servicing their institutional and corporate needs.
They also provide institutional-type services for sophisticated clients and complement their offerings by closely collaborating
with the Investment Bank, the Corporate Bank and Asset Management.




                                                                                                                              7
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Deutsche Bank Group




Distribution Channels and Marketing
Private Bank pursues an omni-channel approach and customers can flexibly choose between different possibilities to access
services and products.

The distribution channels include branch networks in Private Bank Germany and International Private Bank, supported by
customer call centers and self-service terminals. Advisory centers of the Deutsche Bank brand in Germany, Italy and Spain
supplement the branch network and digital offerings including online and mobile banking. PB also has collaborations with self-
employed financial advisors and other sales and cooperation partners, including various cooperations with Business-to-
Business-to-Consumer (B2B2C) partners in Germany. For the private banking and wealth management client segment, the
International Private Bank has a distinct client coverage team approach with Relationship and Investment Managers supported
by Client Service Executives assisting clients with wealth management services and open-architecture products. In addition,
in Germany, Deutsche Oppenheim Family Offices AG provides family office services, discretionary funds and advisory
solutions.

The expansion of digital capabilities remains a strong focus across the businesses as Private Bank observes a significant
change in client behavior towards digital channels. They will continue to optimize their omni-channel mix in the future in order
to provide customers with the most convenient access to products and services.

Asset Management

Corporate Division Overview
With € 928 billion of assets under management as of December 31, 2021, the Asset Management division, which operates
under the brand DWS, is one of the world’s leading asset management organizations. DWS serves a diverse client base of
retail and institutional investors worldwide, with a strong presence in our home market in Germany. The client base includes
government institutions, corporations and foundations as well as individual investors. As a regulated asset manager, DWS
acts as a fiduciary for clients and we are conscious of our impact on society. Responsible Investing has been a key part of our
heritage for more than twenty years.

Deutsche Bank retains 79.49 % ownership interest in DWS and asset management remains a core business for the group.
The shares of DWS are listed on the Frankfurt stock exchange.

There have been no significant capital expenditures or divestitures since January 1, 2019.

Products and Services
DWS’s investment offerings span all major asset classes including equity, fixed income, cash and multi asset as well as
alternative investments. The alternative investments include real estate, infrastructure, private equity, liquid real assets and
sustainable investments. There are also a range of passive investments. In addition, DWS’s solution strategies are targeted
to client needs that cannot be addressed by traditional asset classes alone. Such services include insurance and pension
solutions, asset-liability management, portfolio management solutions and asset allocation advisory. Our deep environmental,
social and governance focus complement each other when creating targeted solutions for our clients.

Distribution Channels and Marketing
DWS’s product offerings are distributed across EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa), the Americas and Asia Pacific through
a single global distribution network. DWS also leverages third-party distribution channels, including other members of
Deutsche Bank Group.

Capital Release Unit

The Capital Release Unit (CRU) was created in July 2019. The CRU’s principal objective is to liberate capital consumed by
low return assets and businesses that earn insufficient returns or that are no longer core to our strategy, by winding those
down in an opportunistic manner. In addition, CRU is focused on reducing costs.

In addition, the CRU division recorded the following significant capital divestitures since January 1, 2019:

In March 2018, Deutsche Bank Group entered into an agreement to sell the retail banking business in Portugal to ABANCA
Corporación Bancaria S.A. The parties closed the transaction in the first half of 2019.

In the fourth quarter of 2021, we concluded the transition of Deutsche Bank’s Prime Finance and Electronic Equities platform
to BNP Paribas resulting in the transfer of technology, clients and staff. This achievement marks the end of a two-year
transition period, which formally commenced in the fourth quarter of 2019.




                                                                                                                              8
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Deutsche Bank Group




Infrastructure

The Infrastructure functions perform control and service activities for the businesses, including tasks relating to Group-wide,
cross-divisional resource-planning, steering and control, as well as tasks relating to risk, liquidity and capital management.

The Infrastructure functions are organized into the following areas of responsibility of our senior management:
– Finance
– Risk
– Chief Administration Office which includes Legal, Compliance and Anti Financial Crime
– Technology, Data and Innovation
– Transformation and Global Procurement

Infrastructure also includes Communications & Corporate Social Responsibility, Human Resources, Global Real Estate and
Group Audit which report to the Chief Executive Officer.

Costs originating in the Infrastructure functions are currently allocated to the corporate divisions based on the planned
allocations, except for technology development costs which were charged to Divisions based on actual expenditures during
2021. During the financial year 2021, the prior cost allocation methodology has been replaced with a driver-based cost
management (DBCM) framework for finance and risk functions and consumption based cost allocation of Technology
Infrastructure products. This new framework links the services provided by the Infrastructure functions to the businesses which
consume them thereby creating enhanced transparency regarding the drivers for the costs which are being charged and
facilitate the identification of cost reduction opportunities.

Significant Capital Expenditures and Divestitures

Information on each Corporate Division’s significant capital expenditures and divestitures for the last three financial years has
been included in the above descriptions of the Corporate Divisions.

Since January 1, 2021, there have been no public takeover offers by third parties with respect to our shares and we have not
made any public takeover offers for our own account in respect of any other company’s shares.




                                                                                                                               9
Deutsche Bank                                                        Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                   Results of Operations




Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements.

Condensed Consolidated Statement of Income
                                                                                                                       2021 increase (decrease)              2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                               from 2020                             from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                                               2021             2020             2019            in € m.              in %            in € m.          in %
Net interest income                                                  11,155           11,526           13,749              (371)                 (3)          (2,223)           (16)
Provision for credit losses                                             515            1,792              723            (1,276)                (71)           1,068            148
Net interest income after provision for credit losses                10,640            9,734           13,026               906                   9           (3,292)           (25)
Commissions and fee income¹                                          10,934            9,424            9,520             1,510                  16              (96)            (1)
Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at
fair value through profit or loss¹                                    3,045            2,465               193              580                  24            2,271            N/M
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value
through other comprehensive income                                       237              323              260               (86)               (27)                 63           24
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at amortized
cost                                                                      1              311                3              (311)               (100)             308             N/M
Net income (loss) from equity method investments                         98              120              110               (23)                 (19)             10                9
Other income (loss)                                                     (58)            (141)            (671)               83                  (59)            531              (79)
Total noninterest income                                             14,255           12,503            9,416             1,752                   14           3,087               33
Total net revenues²                                                  24,895           22,237           22,441             2,658                   12            (205)              (1)
Compensation and benefits                                            10,418           10,471           11,142               (53)                  (1)           (671)              (6)
General and administrative expenses                                  10,821           10,259           12,253               561                    5          (1,993)             (16)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                        5                0            1,037                 4                 N/M           (1,037)           (100)
Restructuring activities                                                261              485              644              (224)                 (46)           (159)             (25)
Total noninterest expenses                                           21,505           21,216           25,076               289                    1          (3,860)             (15)
Profit (loss) before tax                                              3,390            1,021           (2,634)            2,369                 N/M            3,655             N/M
Income tax expense (benefit)                                            880              397            2,630               483                 122           (2,233)             (85)
Profit (loss)                                                         2,510              624           (5,265)            1,886                 N/M            5,888             N/M
Profit (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests                  144              129              125                15                   12               4                3
Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank
shareholders and additional equity components                         2,365               495           (5,390)           1,870                N/M             5,885            N/M
   Profit (loss) attributable to additional equity
   components                                                            426              382              328                44                 12                  53           16
   Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank
   shareholders                                                       1,940               113           (5,718)           1,826                N/M             5,831            N/M
N/M – Not meaningful
1
  For further detail please refer to Note 1 “Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates” of this annual report.
2
  After provision for credit losses.


Net Interest Income
                                                                                                              2021 increase (decrease)                       2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                      from 2020                                      from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                         2021               2020                2019               in € m.                 in %                   in € m.              in %
Total interest and similar
                                               16,599             17,806             25,208                 (1,207)                      (7)               (7,401)               (29)
income
Total interest expenses                         5,444              6,280             11,458                   (836)                  (13)                  (5,178)               (45)
Net interest income                            11,155             11,526             13,749                   (371)                   (3)                  (2,223)               (16)
Average interest-earning
assets1                                      937,947            920,444             956,362                17,503                        2               (35,918)                 (4)
Average interest-bearing
liabilities1                                 690,656            685,830             714,716                 4,826                      1                  (28,886)                (4)
Gross interest yield2                         1.56 %             1.82 %              2.53 %             (0.26) ppt                   (14)               (0.72) ppt               (28)
Gross interest rate paid3                     0.50 %             0.76 %              1.47 %             (0.26) ppt                   (34)               (0.71) ppt               (48)
Net interest spread4                          1.06 %             1.06 %              1.07 %             (0.00) ppt                    (0)               (0.01) ppt                (1)
Net interest margin5                          1.19 %             1.25 %              1.44 %             (0.06) ppt                    (5)               (0.19) ppt               (13)
ppt – Percentage points
1
  Average balances for each year are calculated in general based upon month-end balances.
2
  Gross interest yield is the average interest rate earned on average interest-earning assets.
3
  Gross interest rate paid is the average interest rate paid on average interest-bearing liabilities.
4
  Net interest spread is the difference between the average interest rate earned on average interest-earning assets and the average interest rate paid on average interest-
  bearing liabilities.
5
  Net interest margin is net interest income expressed as a percentage of average interest-earning assets.




                                                                                                                                                                                   10
Deutsche Bank                                     Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                Results of Operations




2021
Net interest income was € 11.2 billion in 2021 compared to € 11.5 billion in 2020, a decrease of € 371 million, or 3 %, as the
negative effects from interest rate headwinds were in part offset by increased interest income from business growth as well
as higher benefits from deposit repricing and the Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations III (TLTRO III) program.
Interest income included € 494 million related to EU government grants under the TLTRO III program in 2021, whereas 2020
included € 86 million under this program and € 43 million related to EU government grants under the Targeted Longer-Term
Refinancing Operations II (TLTRO II) program. Overall, the Bank’s net interest margin was 1.19 % in 2021, a decline of 6
basis points compared to the prior year.

2020
Net interest income was € 11.5 billion in 2020 compared to € 13.7 billion in 2019, a decrease of € 2.2 billion, or 16 %. The
decrease was primarily driven by lower interest rates and unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates. These negative
effects were partly offset by improved volumes and client flows in Investment Bank as well as positive effects from deposit
repricing in the Corporate Bank. Interest income included € 43 million related to EU government grants under the Targeted
Longer-Term Refinancing Operations II (TLTRO II) program in 2020, whereas 2019 included € 93 million under this program.
In addition, interest income for the year 2020 included € 86 million, which were related to EU government grants under the
Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations III (TLTRO III) program. Overall, the bank’s net interest margin declined by 19
basis points compared to the prior year to 1.25 % in 2020.

Net Gains (Losses) on Financial Assets/Liabilities at Fair Value through Profit or Loss
                                                                                     2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                             from 2020                  from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                      2021           2020           2019     in € m.           in %     in € m.           in %
Trading income                                1,859         2,230             197      (370)             (17)    2,033             N/M
Net gains (losses) on non-trading
financial assets mandatory at fair value
through profit or loss                        1,106           276             377       831             N/M       (102)             (27)
Net gains (losses) on financial
assets/liabilities designated at fair value
through profit or loss                          79             (40)          (381)      119             N/M        341              (89)
Total net gains (losses) on financial
assets/liabilities at fair value through
profit or loss                                3,045         2,465             193       580               24     2,271             N/M
N/M – Not meaningful


2021
Net gains on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss were € 3.0 billion in 2021, compared to € 2.5 billion
in 2020. The increase of € 580 million or 24 % was driven by a positive impact from interest rate hedges in C&O as well as
favorable change in fair value of guarantees and an increase in mark-to-market valuation for illiquid products in AM. The
overall increase was partly offset by negative mark-to-market impacts on derivatives in IB reflecting more challenging market
conditions compared to a very favorable trading environment in 2020.

2020
Net gains on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss were € 2.5 billion in 2020, compared to € 193 million
in 2019. The increase of € 2.3 billion was primarily driven by mark-to-market impacts on derivatives as well as positive impacts
from overall strategic repositioning in IB resulting in strong client flows and benefits from increased market volatility. The
development further benefited from positive effects from interest rate hedges in C&O, which did not fully compensate the
negative effects of the lower interest rates in Net Interest Income. This overall increase was partly offset by a negative impact
from de-risking in the Capital Release Unit (CRU).

Net Interest Income and Net Gains (Losses) on Financial Assets/Liabilities at Fair Value through
Profit or Loss

The bank’s trading and risk management activities include interest rate instruments and related derivatives. Under IFRS,
interest and similar income earned from trading instruments and financial instruments designated at fair value through profit
or loss (i.e., coupon and dividend income) and the costs of funding net trading positions are part of net interest income. The
bank’s trading activities can periodically shift income between net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial
assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss depending on a variety of factors, including risk management strategies.

In order to provide a more business-focused discussion, the following table presents net interest income and net gains (losses)
on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss by corporate division.




                                                                                                                                      11
Deutsche Bank                                                         Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                    Results of Operations




                                                                                                                           2021 increase (decrease)        2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                                   from 2020                       from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                                                        2021            2020            2019          in € m.           in %          in € m.              in %
Net interest income                                                          11,155          11,526          13,749             (371)              (3)        (2,223)               (16)
Total net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities
at fair value through profit or loss                                           3,045           2,465             193             580               24          2,271                N/M
Total net interest income and net gains (losses) on
financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss            14,200          13,991          13,942              209                1              48                 0

Breakdown by Corporate Division:1
Corporate Bank                                                                 2,666           2,939           2,718            (273)              (9)           221                   8
Investment Bank                                                                6,891           7,193           5,442            (302)              (4)         1,750                 32
Private Bank                                                                   4,847           4,648           4,991             198                4           (343)                 (7)
Asset Management                                                                 246             (98)             87             345             N/M            (185)               N/M
Capital Release Unit                                                             (18)            (33)            155              15              (45)          (188)               N/M
Corporate & Other                                                               (432)           (658)            549             226              (34)        (1,207)               N/M
Total net interest income and net gains (losses) on
financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss            14,200          13,991          13,942              209                1              48                 0
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
1
  This breakdown reflects net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss only. For a discussion of the corporate
  divisions’ total revenues by product please refer to Note 4 “Business Segments and Related Information”.


2021
Total net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss were € 14.2
billion in 2021, compared to € 14.0 billion in 2020, an increase of € 209 million. This was primarily due to a favorable change
in fair value of guarantees, an increase in mark-to-market valuation for illiquid products and a favorable impact from the
valuation of consolidated guaranteed mutual funds which has a corresponding offset in Other Income in AM. The development
further benefited from a positive impact from interest rate hedges in C&O. In Private Bank, net interest income increased
including positive effects from business growth and higher benefits from TLTRO, partly offset by negative effects from interest
rate headwinds. These overall positive effects were partially offset by negative mark-to-market impacts on derivatives in IB
reflecting more challenging market conditions compared to a very favorable trading environment in 2020. Revenues in CB
also declined primarily as negative effects from interest rate headwinds more than offset the benefits from TLTRO, deposit re-
pricing and business growth.

2020
Total net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss were € 14.0
billion in 2020, compared to € 13.9 billion in 2019, an increase of € 48 million. This was primarily due to mark-to-market impacts
on derivatives as well as positive impacts from overall strategic repositioning in IB resulting in strong client flows and benefits
from increased market volatility, deposit repricing measures in CB and PB and growth in loan volumes in PB. In C&O, mark-
to-market impacts from interest rate hedging activities did not fully compensate the negative effects of the lower interest rates.
This was further offset by continued negative impact of the low interest rate environment on deposit margins in PB and de-
risking costs in CRU. Net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
in AM also decreased compared to the prior year reflecting an unfavorable impact from the valuation of consolidated
guaranteed mutual funds which has a corresponding offset in Other Income.

Provision for Credit Losses

2021
Provision for credit losses was € 515 million in 2021, a decrease of € 1.3 billion, or 71 % versus 2020, reflecting a supportive
credit environment and a strong economic recovery due to the easing of COVID-19 related restrictions. The management
overlay to reduce the weight of short-term forecasts in the standard model and base forward looking information on longer
term averages during the height of the COVID-19 crisis was no longer applied in 2021. The lower level of provision for credit
losses also included a positive effect from the release of a management overlay to account for uncertainties in the macro-
economic outlook at the end of 2020 as the expected uncertainties did not materialize. This was partially offset by a new
management overlay to address macro-economic variables outside the calibrated range of the IFRS 9 model. Provision for
credit losses was 12 basis points of loans supported by strong balance sheet and disciplined risk management. Please refer
to the sections “Segment Results of Operations” and “Risk Report” for further details on provision for credit losses.

2020
Provision for credit losses was € 1.8 billion in 2020, an increase of € 1.1 billion, or 148 % compared to 2019. This increase
was primarily driven by negative impacts from COVID-19 related impairments. The net increase of provisions for credit losses
on performing assets includes a management overlay to reduce the weight of short-term forecasts in the standard model and
base forward looking information on longer term averages during the height of the COVID-19 crisis and an additional
management overlay to account for remaining uncertainties in the macro-economic outlook. Provision for credit losses was
41 basis points of loans reflecting the high quality of the bank’s loan book. Please refer to the sections “Segment Results of
Operations” and “Risk Report” for further details on provision for credit losses.


                                                                                                                                                                                      12
Deutsche Bank                                                       Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                  Results of Operations




Remaining Noninterest Income
                                                                                                              2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                      from 2020                  from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                                                  2021        2020           2019      in € m.          in %      in € m.          in %
Commissions and fee income1                                              10,934       9,424          9,520      1,510              16         (96)            (1)
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value
through other comprehensive income                                         237         323            260          (86)           (27)         63             24
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at amortized
cost                                                                          1        311               3       (311)           (100)       308            N/M
Net income (loss) from equity method investments                             98        120             110        (23)            (19)        10               9
Other income (loss)                                                         (58)      (141)           (671)        83             (59)       531             (79)
Total remaining noninterest income                                       11,210     10,038           9,222      1,172              12        816               9

1
    includes:
     Commissions and fees from fiduciary activities:
       Commissions for administration                                       357         347            327         10               3          19              6
       Commissions for assets under management                            3,734       3,208          3,298        526              16         (90)            (3)
       Commissions for other securities business                            398         341            317         57              17          24              7
     Total                                                                4,489       3,896          3,943        594              15         (47)            (1)
     Commissions, broker’s fees, mark-ups on securities
     underwriting and other securities activities:
       Underwriting and advisory fees                                     2,162       1,625          1,501        537              33         125              8
       Brokerage fees                                                       752         637            637        115              18           0              0
     Total                                                                2,914       2,262          2,137        652              29         125              6
     Fees for other customer services                                     3,530       3,266          3,440        264               8        (174)            (5)
     Total commissions and fee income                                    10,934       9,424          9,520      1,510              16         (96)            (1)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.


Commissions and fee income
2021
Commissions and fee income was € 10.9 billion in 2021, an increase of € 1.5 billion, or 16 %, compared to 2020. The increase
was driven by € 537 million higher underwriting and advisory fees due to strong growth in equity origination revenues from
record Special Purpose Acquisition Company (SPAC) activity, significant growth in mergers & acquisition activity and higher
volumes during the year. Commissions for assets under management increased by € 526 million due to higher management
fees from favorable markets and net inflows combined with favorable effects from a Multi Asset performance fee as well as
increased real estate performance and transaction fees in AM. Fees for other customer services improved by € 264 million
driven by strong performance in Leveraged Debt Capital Markets partly offset by a negative impact of € 154 million on revenues
in PB subsequent to the BGH ruling. Brokerage fees increased by € 115 million mainly driven by a significant increase in
revenues from investment products in PB.

2020
Commissions and fee income was € 9.4 billion in 2020, a decrease of € 96 million, or 1 %, compared to 2019. The decrease
included € 174 million lower fees for other customer services in the Corporate Bank mainly driven by reduced economic
activities. Commissions for assets under management decreased by € 90 million in AM mainly due to absence of performance
fees from Multi Asset and Alternatives recognized in 2019. Underwriting and advisory fees increased by € 125 million mainly
driven by increased activity and market share gains in debt market as well as an increase in global fee pool and issuances in
equities. Brokerage fees have remained flat year-over-year mainly as the negative impact from discontinued business activities
in CRU following the execution of the bank’s transformation strategy announced in July 2019 was fully compensated by higher
commission and fee income in PB from investment and insurance products including benefits from re-pricing measures.

Net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income
2021
Net gains on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income were € 237 million in 2021, a decrease of €
86 million, or 27 % compared to 2020 driven by lower gains from the sale of bonds and securities from strategic liquidity
reserve.

2020
Net gains on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income were € 323 million in 2020, an increase of €
63 million, or 24 % compared to 2019 driven mainly by higher gains from the sale of bonds and securities from strategic
liquidity reserve.




                                                                                                                                                               13
Deutsche Bank                                                           Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                      Results of Operations




Net gains (losses) on financial assets at amortized cost
2021
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at amortized cost were € 1 million in 2021 compared to € 311 million in 2020, driven by
the absence of a 2020 gain from sale of assets out of the Hold-to-collect portfolio.

2020
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at amortized cost were € 311 million in 2020 and € 3 million in 2019, driven by a sale of
assets out of the Hold-to-collect portfolio in 2020 as part of the bank’s strategy for managing the interest rate risk in the banking
book.

Net income (loss) from equity method investments
2021
Net income from equity method investments was € 98 million in 2021 compared to € 120 million in 2020, a decrease of € 23
million, or 19 %.

2020
Net income from equity method investments was € 120 million in 2020 compared to € 110 million in 2019, an increase of € 10
million, or 9 %.

Other income (loss)
2021
Other income (loss) was € (58) million in 2021 compared to € (141) million in 2020. The improvement was driven by positive
impacts associated with hedge ineffectiveness along with fair value hedge accounting adjustments. Further, favorable year-
on-year movements in CRU were driven by lower de-risking impacts. This was partly offset by a negative impact from valuation
adjustments on liabilities of guaranteed mutual funds in AM that offsets the aforementioned positive impact in net gains (losses)
on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.

2020
Other income (loss) was € (141) million in 2020 compared to € (671) million in 2019. The improvement was driven by positive
impacts associated with hedge ineffectiveness along with fair value hedge accounting adjustments. Furthermore, other income
includes a positive impact from a valuation adjustment on liabilities of guaranteed mutual funds in AM that offsets a negative
impact in net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.

Noninterest Expenses
                                                                                                                        2021 increase (decrease)            2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                                from 2020                           from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                                              2021              2020             2019            in € m.             in %            in € m.          in %
Compensation and benefits                                           10,418           10,471            11,142                (53)                (1)           (671)             (6)
General and administrative expenses¹                                10,821           10,259            12,253                561                  5          (1,993)            (16)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                                   5                0             1,037                  4              N/M            (1,037)           (100)
Restructuring activities                                               261              485               644               (224)              (46)            (159)            (25)
Total noninterest expenses                                          21,505           21,216            25,076                289                 1           (3,860)            (15)
N/M – Not meaningful

1
 includes:
  Information Technology                                             4,321             3,862             5,011               459                12           (1,149)            (23)
  Occupancy, furniture and equipment
  expenses                                                           1,727            1,724             1,693                  3                 0               31               2
  Regulatory, tax & insurance2                                       1,395            1,407             1,440                (12)               (1)             (33)             (2)
  Professional services3                                               924              977             1,142                (53)               (5)            (165)            (14)
  Banking Services and outsourced operations3                          946              967               969                (21)               (2)              (2)             (0)
  Market Data and Research services                                    347              376               421                (28)               (8)             (46)            (11)
  Travel expenses                                                       46               76               256                (31)              (40)            (180)            (70)
  Marketing expenses                                                   178              174               251                  3                 2              (77)            (31)
  Other expenses4                                                      938              697             1,070                241                35             (373)            (35)
Total general and administrative expenses                           10,821           10,259            12,253                561                 5           (1,993)            (16)
2
    Includes bank levy of € 553 million in 2021, € 633 million in 2020 and € 622 million in 2019.
3
    Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.
4
    Includes litigation related expenses of € 466 million in 2021, € 158 million in 2020 and € 473 million in 2019. See Note 27 “Provisions”, for more detail on litigation.




                                                                                                                                                                                  14
Deutsche Bank                                   Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                              Results of Operations




Compensation and benefits
2021
Compensation and benefits decreased by € 53 million, or 1 % to € 10.4 billion in 2021 compared to € 10.5 billion in 2020. The
decrease was primarily driven by lower fixed compensation expenses resulting from workforce reductions offset by an increase
in variable compensation costs.

2020
Compensation and benefits decreased by € 671 million, or 6 %, to € 10.5 billion in 2020 compared to € 11.1 billion in 2019.
The decrease was primarily driven by lower fixed compensation expenses resulting from workforce reductions.

General and administrative expenses
2021
General and administrative expenses increased by € 561 million, or 5 %, to € 10.8 billion in 2021 compared to € 10.3 billion
in 2020. The increase was driven by € 513 million higher transformation charges, which included increased information
technology costs partly related to a contract settlement and software impairments, partly triggered by the bank’s migration to
the cloud technology. By the end of 2021, 97 % of total transformation-related effects anticipated through the end of 2022
were already recognized. Litigation expenses increased by € 308 million, partly related to the BGH ruling on pricing
arrangements. Apart from these, general and administrative expenses decreased compared to the prior year with reductions
across major cost categories including professional service fees as well as travel and market data and research expenses.

2020
General and administrative expenses decreased by € 2.0 billion, or 16 %, to € 10.3 billion in 2020 compared to € 12.3 billion
in 2019. The decrease was driven by € 655 million lower transformation charges as 2019 included higher software impairments
and higher litigation expenses. Apart from these, general and administrative expenses further decreased compared to the
prior year following a disciplined cost management with reductions across all major cost categories including IT expenses due
to lower software amortization and a reduction of IT service expenses, professional service fees as well as travel and marketing
expenses.

Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets
2021
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets was € 5 million in the CB in 2021. No impairment charges were reported
for 2020.

2020
No impairment charges were reported for 2020. Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets of € 1.0 billion was reported
in 2019. The announcement of the strategic transformation in July 2019 triggered the impairment review of Deutsche Bank’s
goodwill. A worsening macro-economic outlook, including interest rate curves, industry-specific market growth corrections, as
well as the impact related to the implementation of the transformation strategy resulted in the full impairment of the Wealth
Management goodwill of € 545 million in PB and the GTB & CF goodwill of € 492 million in CB in the second quarter 2019.

Restructuring
2021
Expenses for restructuring activities were € 261 million in 2021 compared to € 485 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily
due to lower restructuring costs in PB.

2020
Expenses for restructuring activities were € 485 million in 2020 compared to € 644 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily
due to higher costs related to the execution of the bank’s transformation strategy in 2019.

Income Tax Expense
2021
Income tax expense in 2021 was € 880 million compared to € 397 million in 2020. The effective tax rate in 2021 of 26 %
benefited from a positive DTA valuation adjustment of € 274 million related to our strong US performance in 2021.

2020
Income tax expense in 2020 was € 397 million compared to € 2.6 billion in 2019. The effective tax rate in 2020 was 39 %.




                                                                                                                             15
Deutsche Bank                                                        Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                   Results of Operations




Net profit (loss)
2021
Net profit in 2021 was € 2.5 billion, compared to € 624 million in the prior year. The increase in net profit was primarily driven
by higher revenues across core businesses and reduced levels of provision for credit losses largely due to favorable credit
environment and high-quality loan book. This was partly offset by a slight increase in non-interest expenses.

2020
Net profit in 2020 was € 624 million, compared to a net loss of € 5.3 billion in the prior year. The increase in net profit was
primarily driven by strong revenue performance in Investment Bank, absence of 2019 deferred tax valuation adjustments and
transformation-related goodwill impairments as well as decreases in transformation charges, litigation expenses, restructuring
and severance expenses and in adjusted costs excluding transformation charges reflecting workforce reductions, disciplined
expense management and positive impact of currency translation effects. These positive effects were partly offset by
increased levels of provision for credit losses.


Segment Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of the results of the business segments. See Note 4 “Business Segments and Related
Information” to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding:

– changes in the format of the bank’s segment disclosure and
– the framework of the bank’s management reporting systems.

The Group’s segment reporting follows the organizational structure as reflected in its internal management reporting systems,
which are the basis for assessing the financial performance of the business segments and for allocating resources to the
business segments. The criterion for segmentation into divisions is the bank’s organizational structure as it existed at
December 31, 2021. Prior year segmental information is presented in the current structure.

                                                                                                                                                                         2021
in € m.                                                  Corporate        Investment            Private         Asset             Capital       Corporate &              Total
(unless stated otherwise)                                    Bank               Bank              Bank     Management        Release Unit            Other       Consolidated
Net revenues1                                               5,150             9,631             8,234            2,708                 26             (339)           25,410
Provision for credit losses                                    (3)              104               446                5                (42)               5               515
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                   1,447             2,199             2,810               822              128             3,012            10,418
General and administrative expenses                         2,659             3,583             4,440               840            1,306            (2,008)           10,821
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                         5                 0                 0                 0                0                   0               5
Restructuring activities                                      42                47               173                 2               (2)                 (0)            261
Total noninterest expenses                                 4,153             5,830             7,423             1,664            1,432              1,004           21,505
Noncontrolling interests                                       0               (17)                0               223                0               (206)               0
Profit (loss) before tax                                   1,000             3,715               366               816           (1,364)            (1,143)           3,390
Cost/income ratio                                           81 %              61 %              90 %              61 %             N/M                 N/M             85 %
Assets2                                                  245,716           615,906           310,496            10,387          131,775              9,713        1,323,993
Additions to non-current assets                               17                 6               149                32                1              1,734            1,939
Risk-weighted assets                                      65,406           140,600            85,366            14,415           28,059             17,783          351,629
Leverage exposure (fully loaded)3                        299,892           530,361           320,692            10,678           38,830             22,761        1,124,667
Average allocated shareholders' equity                    10,301            24,181            12,663             4,815            4,473                   0          56,434
Post-tax return on average shareholders’
equity4                                                        6%              10 %               1%               12 %            (23) %              N/M                3%
Post-tax return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity4                                          7%              11 %               1%               30 %            (23) %              N/M                4%

1
  includes:
   Net interest income                                      2,605             3,332             4,601                 (5)              58              564            11,155
     Net income (loss) from equity method
     investments                                                 3               (34)              40                81                  7                1                98
2
  includes:
   Equity method investments                                    72              462               180               349                25                 4            1,091
N/M – Not meaningful
3
  The Group leverage exposure is presented excluding certain Euro-based exposures facing Eurosystem central banks based on the ECB-decision (EU) 2020/1306 and after
  having obtained permission from the ECB. The segmental leverage exposures are presented without that deduction.
4
  The post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity at the Group level reflects the reported effective tax rate for the Group, which
  was 26 % for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity of the segments, the
  Group effective tax rate was adjusted to exclude the impact of permanent differences not attributed to the segments, so that the segment tax rates were 28 % for the year
  ended December 31, 2021. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report.




                                                                                                                                                                                16
Deutsche Bank                                                        Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                   Results of Operations




                                                                                                                                                                         2020
in € m.                                                  Corporate        Investment            Private         Asset             Capital       Corporate &              Total
(unless stated otherwise)                                    Bank               Bank              Bank     Management        Release Unit            Other       Consolidated
Net revenues1                                               5,146             9,286             8,126            2,229               (225)            (534)           24,028
Provision for credit losses                                   364               690               711                2                 29               (4)            1,792
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                   1,402             2,081             2,863               740              168             3,217            10,471
General and administrative expenses                         2,813             3,323             4,238               763            1,774            (2,652)           10,259
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                         0                 0                 0                 0                0                  0                0
Restructuring activities                                      28                14               413                22                5                  3              485
Total noninterest expenses                                 4,243             5,418             7,513             1,526            1,947                568           21,216
Noncontrolling interests                                       0                11                 0               157               (0)              (169)               0
Profit (loss) before tax                                     539             3,166               (99)              544           (2,200)              (929)           1,021
Cost/income ratio                                           82 %              58 %              92 %              68 %             N/M                 N/M             88 %
Assets2                                                  237,675           573,536           296,596             9,453          197,667             10,333        1,325,259
Additions to non-current assets                               10                 4               202                32                0              3,174            3,423
Risk-weighted assets                                      57,483           128,292            77,074             9,997           34,415             21,690          328,951
Leverage exposure (fully loaded)3                        273,959           476,097           307,746             4,695           71,726             29,243        1,078,268
Average allocated shareholders' equity                     9,945            22,911            11,553             4,757            6,166                  0           55,332
Post-tax return on average shareholders’
equity4                                                        3%               9%               (1) %              8%             (26) %              N/M                0%
Post-tax return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity4                                          3%              10 %              (1) %             21 %            (27) %              N/M                0%

1
  includes:
   Net interest income                                      2,883             3,325             4,499                  1               61              756            11,526
     Net income (loss) from equity method
     investments                                                 3               22                23                63                  9                1              120
2
  includes:
   Equity method investments                                    69              399                60               304                67                 4              901
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
3
  The Group leverage exposure is presented excluding certain Euro-based exposures facing Eurosystem central banks based on the ECB-decision (EU) 2020/1306 and after
  having obtained permission from the ECB. The segmental leverage exposures are presented without that deduction.
4
  The post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity at the Group level reflects the reported effective tax rate for the Group, which
  was 39 % for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity of the segments, the
  Group effective tax rate was adjusted to exclude the impact of permanent differences not attributed to the segments, so that the segment tax rates were 28 % for the year
  ended December 31, 2020. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report.




                                                                                                                                                                               17
Deutsche Bank                                                        Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                   Results of Operations




                                                                                                                                                                             2019
in € m.                                                  Corporate        Investment            Private         Asset               Capital       Corporate &                Total
(unless stated otherwise)                                    Bank               Bank              Bank     Management          Release Unit            Other         Consolidated
Net revenues1                                               5,247             7,023             8,239              2,332                217              107             23,165
Provision for credit losses                                   284               110               344                  1                (14)              (0)               723
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                   1,419             2,156             2,971               832                 359             3,406            11,142
General and administrative expenses                         2,829             4,073             4,517               851               2,898            (2,916)           12,253
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                       492                 0               545                   0                0                   0            1,037
Restructuring activities                                     137               169               125                  29              143                  41              644
Total noninterest expenses                                 4,877             6,397             8,159               1,711            3,400                 531           25,076
Noncontrolling interests                                       0                20                (0)                152                1                (173)               0
Profit (loss) before tax                                      86               496              (263)                468           (3,170)               (251)          (2,634)
Cost/income ratio                                           93 %              91 %              99 %                73 %             N/M                  N/M            108 %
Assets2                                                  228,846           501,591           270,334               9,936          259,224              27,743        1,297,674
Additions to non-current assets                                9                 1               167                  27                0               1,117            1,322
Risk-weighted assets                                      58,993           116,367            74,032               9,527           45,874              19,223          324,015
Leverage exposure (fully loaded)                         270,836           432,066           282,575               4,643          126,905              51,016        1,168,040
Average allocated shareholders' equity                    10,340            21,736            11,663               4,865            7,253               4,314           60,170
Post-tax return on average shareholders’
equity3                                                      (0) %              1%              (2) %               7%                (32) %             N/M              (10) %
Post-tax return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity3                                        (0) %              1%              (2) %              18 %               (33) %             N/M              (11) %

1
  includes:
   Net interest income                                      2,635             2,709             4,838                (39)                85             3,520            13,749
     Net income (loss) from equity method
     investments                                                 3               32                14                49                  12                 1                110
2
  includes:
   Equity method investments                                    66              412                82               276                  90                 4                929
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
3
  The post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity at the Group level reflects the reported effective tax rate for the Group, which
  was (100) % for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity of the segments, the
  Group effective tax rate was adjusted to exclude the impact of permanent differences not attributed to the segments, so that the segment tax rates were 28 % for the year
  ended December 31, 2019. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report.


Corporate Bank
                                                                                                                      2021 increase (decrease)          2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                     from 2020                         from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                    2021           2020            2019            in € m.            in %        in € m.             in %
Net revenues
Corporate Treasury Services                                                3,130           3,125           3,077                 5                0           48                  2
Institutional Client Services                                              1,294           1,274           1,405                20                2         (131)                (9)
Business Banking                                                             726             747             765               (21)              (3)         (18)                (2)
Total net revenues                                                         5,150           5,146           5,247                 4                0         (101)                (2)
Of which:
Net interest income                                                        2,605           2,883           2,635             (278)              (10)         248                 9
Commissions and fee income                                                 2,203           2,078           2,192              125                 6         (114)               (5)
Remaining income                                                             343             185             420              158                85         (235)              (56)
Provision for credit losses                                                   (3)            364             284             (367)             N/M            80                28
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                  1,447          1,402            1,419               46                 3          (17)               (1)
General and administrative expenses                                        2,659          2,813            2,829             (154)               (5)         (16)               (1)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                             5              0              492                5              N/M          (492)             N/M
Restructuring activities                                                      42             28              137               13               47          (108)              (79)
Total noninterest expenses                                                 4,153          4,243            4,877              (90)               (2)        (634)              (13)
Noncontrolling interests                                                       0              0                0                0              N/M             0              N/M
Profit (loss) before tax                                                   1,000            539               86              461               86           453              N/M
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                      246            238              229                8                 3            9                 4
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses, in € bn)                          122            115              119                8                 7           (5)               (4)
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                          13,265         13,320           13,471              (55)               (0)        (151)               (1)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.




                                                                                                                                                                                   18
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Results of Operations




2021
Profit before tax of the Corporate Bank was € 1.0 billion for the full year 2021, up from € 539 million in 2020, driven by a
decrease in credit loss provisions as well as lower noninterest expenses. Adjusted for transformation charges, restructuring
and severance expenses, impairments of goodwill and other intangible assets and specific revenue items, profit before tax
was € 1.2 billion, 70 % above the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by lower credit loss provisions, lower litigation
charges as well as lower adjusted costs, partly offset by higher severance and restructuring.

Full year net revenues were € 5.2 billion, flat versus 2020, as business volume growth and deposit repricing offset interest
rate headwinds.

Corporate Treasury Services revenues of € 3.1 billion were essentially unchanged compared to prior year, as the benefits of
the deposit repricing, ECB’s TLTRO III program and other business initiatives offset interest rate headwinds. Institutional Client
Services net revenues of € 1.3 billion were € 20 million or 2 % higher than prior year driven by underlying business
performance. Business Banking net revenues of € 0.7 billion decreased by 3 %, as interest rate headwinds more than offset
business growth and progress on repricing agreements.

Provision for credit losses was a net release of € 3 million, compared to provisions of € 364 million in 2020, reflecting low
levels of impairments and releases of Stage 1 and 2 provisions compared to the prior year.

Noninterest expenses were € 4.2 billion, down 2 % year on year, partly reflecting a non-recurrence of litigation expenses in
the prior year. Adjusted costs ex-transformation charges were € 4.0 billion, down 1 %, driven by headcount reduction and
other initiatives. Severance and restructuring expenses rose 42 % year on year, reflecting headcount reductions in support of
the bank’s transformation programme.

2020
Profit before tax of the Corporate Bank was € 539 million for the full year 2020, compared to € 86 million in the prior year. The
year-on-year increase was largely driven by an impairment of goodwill of € 492 million in 2019 as well as lower restructuring
costs in 2020. Adjusted for transformation charges, restructuring and severance expenses, impairments of goodwill and other
intangible assets and specific revenue items, profit before tax was € 692 million in 2020.

Net revenues for the full year 2020 were € 5.1 billion, or € 5.2 billion excluding a loss on sale of Postbank systems, 2 % lower
compared to 2019.

Corporate Treasury Services revenues of € 3.1 billion increased by € 48 million or 2 % compared to the prior year as the
negative impact from a lower interest rate environment was largely compensated by deposit repricing, balance sheet
management initiatives and ECB tiering as well as portfolio rebalancing actions. Institutional Client Services reported net
revenues € 1.3 billion in 2020, a decrease of € 131 million, or 9 %, compared to € 1.4 billion in the prior year. The decline was
impacted by significantly lower revenues in Securities Services and Trust and Agency Services, mainly due to interest rate
reductions in the U.S. and in Asia. Revenues in Business Banking were € 0.7 billion and decreased by € 18 million or 2 %
driven by the lower interest rate environment, partially offset by positive effects from deposit repricing agreements.

Provision for credit losses was € 364 million, an increase from € 284 million in 2019, affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Noninterest expenses in 2020 were € 4.2 billion, a decrease of € 634 million or 13 % compared to € 4.9 billion in the prior year
which was impacted by the execution of the transformation strategy, which triggered an impairment of goodwill, higher
restructuring costs and transformation charges mainly related to IT impairments. Furthermore, costs in 2019 were negatively
impacted by changes in internal cost allocations following the resegmentation in 2019.

Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges were € 4.0 billion, down 2 % year on year. The decrease reflects a workforce
reduction and business initiatives.




                                                                                                                               19
Deutsche Bank                                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                               Results of Operations




Investment Bank
                                                                                                                 2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                 2021           2020            2019       in € m.         in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues
Fixed Income, Currency (FIC) Sales & Trading                            7,063          7,074            5,524         (11)            (0)      1,550             28
  Debt Origination                                                      1,573          1,500            1,117          73              5         383             34
  Equity Origination                                                      544            369              148         174             47         221           149
  Advisory                                                                491            244              370         247           101         (126)           (34)
Origination & Advisory                                                  2,608          2,114            1,635         494             23         479             29
Other                                                                     (40)            99             (136)       (139)          N/M          235           N/M
Total net revenues                                                      9,631          9,286            7,023         345              4       2,263             32
Provision for credit losses                                               104            690              110        (587)           (85)        581           N/M
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                               2,199          2,081            2,156         118              6         (75)            (3)
General and administrative expenses                                     3,583          3,323            4,073         260              8        (750)           (18)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                          0              0                0           0           N/M            0           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                   47             14              169          33           N/M         (155)           (92)
Total noninterest expenses                                              5,830          5,418            6,397         411              8        (979)           (15)
Noncontrolling interests                                                  (17)            11               20         (29)          N/M           (8)           (41)
Profit (loss) before tax                                                3,715          3,166              496         549            17        2,670           N/M
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                   616            574              502          42              7          72             14
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses, in € bn)                        93             69               75          24            34           (6)            (8)
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                        7,202          7,584            7,494        (382)            (5)         90              1
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.


2021
Profit before tax was € 3.7 billion in 2021, an increase of € 549 million compared to the prior year. The increase was mainly
driven by slightly higher revenues, as well as significantly lower provision for credit losses, partly offset by higher non-interest
expenses.

Net revenues were € 9.6 billion in 2021, an increase of € 345 million or 4 % compared to 2020.

Revenues in FIC Sales & Trading were € 7.1 billion, essentially flat versus the prior year. Financing revenues were significantly
higher, driven by increased net interest income as a result of increased lending activity, with solid performance across all
businesses. Revenues in Credit Trading were significantly higher due to strength in the distressed business. Rates and Foreign
Exchange revenues were significantly lower, reflecting more challenging market conditions compared to a favorable trading
environment in 2020. Revenues in Emerging Markets were lower due to a decline in Asia, which did not benefit from the
heightened levels of activity seen in 2020. This was partially offset by growth in the Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East
and Africa region, with Latin America broadly flat.

Origination and Advisory net revenues were € 2.6 billion, a € 494 million or 23 % increase compared to the prior year. Debt
Origination revenues were € 1.6 billion, higher than the prior year driven principally by strong performance in Leveraged Debt
Capital Markets, which more than offset normalized Investment Grade debt issuances versus the prior year. Equity Origination
revenues of € 544 million were significantly higher, reflecting record Special Purpose Acquisition Company (SPAC) activity in
the first quarter and subsequent SPAC merger (de-SPAC) revenues through the year. Advisory revenues of € 491 million were
significantly higher reflecting the growth in M&A activity and record volumes during the year.

Other revenues were negative € 40 million, compared to positive € 99 million in 2020. The year–on-year decrease was
materially driven by a reversal of previously recorded Collateralized Loan Obligation (CLO) hedge gains, resulting from the
release of underlying provisions for credit losses, with an overall net neutral impact to profit before tax.

Provision for credit losses was € 104 million or 14 basis points of average loans, a decrease of € 587 million primarily driven
by the non-recurrence of COVID-19 related impairments in the prior year.

Noninterest expenses in 2021 were € 5.8 billion, an increase of € 411 million or 8 % compared to the prior year, reflecting
higher compensation costs, increased bank levy and infrastructure service cost allocations.




                                                                                                                                                                  20
Deutsche Bank                                     Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                Results of Operations




2020
Profit before tax was € 3.2 billion in 2020, an increase of € 2.7 billion compared to the prior year. The increase was mainly
driven by significantly higher revenues, as well as lower general and administrative expenses and restructuring, partly offset
by significantly higher provisions for credit losses.

Net revenues were € 9.3 billion in 2020, an increase of € 2.3 billion or 32 % compared to 2019.

Revenues in FIC Sales & Trading were € 7.1 billion, an increase of € 1.6 billion or 28 %. Rates revenues were significantly
higher, with the business benefitting from the impact of strategic repositioning, in addition to strong client flows and market
conditions. Foreign Exchange revenues were significantly higher, driven by the increased market volatility, specifically in the
first half of the year and strength in derivatives. Revenues from Credit Trading were lower driven by the adverse credit market
conditions in the first quarter, though the business recovered well in the second half of the year. Revenues in Emerging
Markets were significantly higher, with all three regions up versus the prior year. Revenues in Financing were lower, with the
business also affected by the adverse credit market in the first quarter, in addition to lower revenues from sectors impacted
by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Origination and Advisory net revenues were € 2.1 billion, a € 479 million or 29 % increase compared to the prior year. Debt
Origination revenues were € 1.5 billion, significantly higher than the prior year driven principally by increased activity and
market share gains in Investment Grade Debt. Equity Origination revenues of € 369 million were also significantly higher,
reflecting a record industry fee pool and DB’s strength in the Special Purpose Acquisition Company market. Advisory revenues
of € 244 million were significantly lower in a reduced fee pool environment which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Other revenues were € 99 million, compared to negative € 136 million in 2019. The year–on-year increase was materially
driven by two items: A small gain of € 6 million relating to the impact of DVA on certain derivative liabilities versus a loss of €
140 million in 2019. Additionally, 2020 saw material Collateralized Loan Obligation (CLO) hedge gains on underlying provisions
for credit losses driven by the COIVD-19 pandemic, with an overall net neutral impact on profit before tax.

Provision for credit losses was € 690 million or 90 basis points of average loans, an increase of € 581 million or 75 basis points
primarily driven by COVID-19 related impairments.

Noninterest expenses in 2020 were € 5.4 billion, a decrease of € 979 million or 15 % compared to the prior year, reflecting
lower adjusted costs, reduced restructuring and severance and lower litigation. Adjusted costs excluding transformation
charges decreased by 9 % driven by disciplined expense management and lower service cost allocations.




                                                                                                                                21
Deutsche Bank                                                   Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                              Results of Operations




Private Bank
                                                                                                                2021 increase (decrease)      2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                               from 2020                     from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                2021          2020           2019         in € m.           in %        in € m.          in %
Net revenues:
Private Bank Germany                                                   5,008          4,989          5,109             19              0           (120)               (2)
International Private Bank                                             3,226          3,136          3,130             90              3              7                 0
   IPB Personal Banking1                                                 908            870            905             38              4            (34)               (4)
   IPB Private Banking2 and Wealth Management                          2,318          2,266          2,225             52              2             41                 2
Total net revenues                                                     8,234          8,126          8,239            109              1           (113)               (1)
   Of which:
   Net interest income                                                 4,601          4,499          4,838            102              2           (339)           (7)
   Commissions and fee income                                          3,207          3,052          2,866            155              5            187             7
   Remaining income                                                      426            574            534           (148)           (26)            40             7
Provision for credit losses                                              446            711            344           (265)           (37)           367           107
Noninterest expenses:
Compensation and benefits                                              2,810         2,863          2,971             (53)            (2)         (108)             (4)
General and administrative expenses                                    4,440         4,238          4,517             202              5          (280)             (6)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                         0             0            545               0           N/M           (545)           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                 173           413            125            (240)           (58)          287            N/M
Total noninterest expenses                                             7,423         7,513          8,159             (91)            (1)         (645)             (8)
Noncontrolling interests                                                   0             0             (0)             (0)           (87)            1            N/M
Profit (loss) before tax                                                 366           (99)          (263)            465           N/M            164             (62)
Total assets (in € bn)3                                                  310           297            270              14              5            26              10
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses, in € bn)                      254           237            227              17              7            10               5
Assets under Management (in € bn)4                                       553           493            482              59             12            11               2
Net flows (in € bn)                                                       30            16              4              14             88            12            N/M
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                      28,100        29,764         31,421          (1,665)            (6)       (1,657)             (5)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
1
  Including small businesses in Italy, Spain and India.
2
  Including small & mid caps in Italy, Spain and India.
3
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.
4
  We define assets under management as (a) assets we hold on behalf of customers for investment purposes and/or (b) client assets that are managed by us. We manage
  assets under management on a discretionary or advisory basis, or these assets are deposited with us. Deposits are considered assets under management if they serve
  investment purposes. In the Private Bank Germany, IPB Personal Banking and IPB Private Banking, this includes term deposits and savings deposits. In IPB Wealth
  Management, it is assumed that all customer deposits are held with us primarily for investment purposes.


2021
In 2021, the Private Bank made significant progress in the execution of its transformation strategy and in its priority to grow
business volumes. Net new business volumes were € 45 billion across assets under management and loans. Profit before tax
of € 366 million in 2021 was impacted by transformation-related effects of € 458 million including € 237 million restructuring
and severance expenses as well as € 221 million transformation charges. This compares to a loss before tax of € 99 million
in 2020, which included a € 88 million negative impact from the sale of Postbank Systems AG and transformation-related
effects of € 642 million. Adjusted for transformation-related effects and for specific revenue items, profit before tax was € 721
million in 2021 despite negative impacts of € 284 million from the BGH ruling. This compares to an adjusted profit before tax
of € 518 million in 2020. The year over year improvement mainly reflected lower provision for credit losses and revenue growth.

Net revenues of € 8.2 billion in 2021 increased by € 109 million, or 1 %, compared to 2020. Revenues were up 2 % year-on-
year if adjusted for the aforementioned loss of € 88 million in the prior year from the sale of Postbank Systems AG and a
negative revenue impact of € 154 million in 2021 related to the BGH ruling. Business growth in investment products and loans
in a normalizing market environment more than offset significant interest rate headwinds. Revenues also benefited from the
ECB’s TLTRO III program.

In the Private Bank Germany, net revenues were € 5.0 billion and remained stable year-on-year. Excluding the impact of the
BGH ruling and the aforementioned negative impact from the sale of Postbank Systems AG in prior year, revenues were up
2 %. Continued strong business growth in investment and mortgage products mitigated significant deposit margin compression
impacts. Revenue growth also benefited from the ECB’s TLTRO III program.

Net revenues in the International Private Bank (IPB) of € 3.2 billion increased by 3 % year-on-year reflecting business growth
in a normalizing environment. Revenues also benefited from the ECB’s TLTRO III program. IPB’s client segment Private
Banking and Wealth Management achieved net revenues of € 2.3 billion in 2021, up 2 % year-on-year, or 3 % excluding
specific revenue items, as the contribution from Sal. Oppenheim was slightly higher in 2020. Headwinds from lower interest
rates and negative impacts from foreign currency translation were more than offset by sustained business growth in investment
products and lending supported by continued hiring of relationship managers. Net revenues in the Personal Banking client
segment increased by € 38 million, or 4 %, to € 908 million in 2021. Sustained business growth in investment products and
lower funding costs more than offset continued headwinds from lower interest rates.



                                                                                                                                                                       22
Deutsche Bank                                     Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                Results of Operations




Provision for credit losses amounted to € 446 million in 2021 compared to € 711 million in 2020. The year-on-year decrease
of 37 % reflected a more benign macroeconomic environment, tight risk discipline and a high-quality loan book.

Non-interest expenses were € 7.4 billion, down € 91 million, or 1 % year-on-year, reflecting lower transformation-related effects
partly offset by higher litigation charges, which included a € 128 million negative impact related to the BGH ruling.

Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges of € 6.8 billion increased by € 42 million, or 1 % year-on-year. Incremental
savings from transformation initiatives were offset by higher spend for technology and internal services, higher costs for deposit
protection schemes and higher variable compensation driven by improved business performance. The increase also reflected
the non-recurrence of a one-time benefit in the prior year associated with pension obligations.

Assets under Management of € 553 billion increased by € 59 billion compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was
mainly attributable to € 30 billion net inflows as well as € 23 billion market appreciation and € 8 billion positive impact f rom
foreign exchange rate movements. Net inflows of € 30 billion during 2021 were mainly in investment products.

2020
In 2020, the Private Bank continued the implementation of its strategic agenda. Results were impacted by transformation-
related effects of € 642 million including € 520 million restructuring and severance expenses as well as € 122 million
transformation charges, which were the main reasons for a reported pre-tax loss of € 99 million in 2020. Adjusted for these
transformation-related effects and for specific revenue items, profit before tax was € 518 million in 2020 compared to adjusted
profit before tax of € 522 million in 2019. Higher provision for credit losses and higher litigation charges were offset by cost
reductions.

Net revenues of € 8.1 billion in 2020 declined by € 113 million, or 1 %, compared to 2019, mainly reflecting lower positive
contributions from specific revenue items which included in 2020 a negative impact of € 88 million related to the sale of
Postbank Systems AG. Excluding specific revenue items, revenues remained at prior year level as growth in volumes and
higher commission and fee income compensated headwinds from the low interest rate environment and the COVID-19
pandemic.

In the Private Bank Germany, net revenues of € 5.0 billion declined by € 120 million, or 2 %, year-on-year. Revenues excluding
the impact related to Postbank Systems AG were largely stable compared to 2019. Ongoing headwinds from lower interest
rates and COVID-19 were offset by growth in loan revenues and higher commission and fee income from investment products,
insurance products and from repricing measures.

Net revenues in the International Private Bank (IPB) of € 3.1 billion remained essentially flat compared to 2019. IPB’s client
segment Private Banking and Wealth Management achieved net revenues of € 2.3 billion in 2020, an increase of € 41 million,
or 2 %, compared to 2019. Headwinds from lower interest rates and COVID-19 and negative impacts from foreign currency
translation were more than offset by business growth in investment products and lending reflecting benefits from
previous hiring. Net revenues in the Personal Banking client segment declined by € 34 million, or 4 %, to € 870 million in 2020.
The decline was mainly due to negative impacts from deposit margin compression and COVID-19.

Provision for credit losses amounted to € 711 million in 2020 compared to € 344 million in 2019. The increase was mainly due
to negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as higher benefits in 2019 from portfolio sales and model
refinements. The increase was also related to the growth in the loan business.

Non-interest expenses of € 7.5 billion declined by € 645 million, or 8 %, compared to 2019. The positive year-on-year impact
from the non-recurrence of a goodwill impairment of € 545 million in 2019 was largely offset by € 297 million higher
transformation-related effects driven by higher restructuring and severance expenses reflecting initiatives related to the
execution of the strategic agenda as well as € 104 million higher litigation charges.

Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges of € 6.8 billion reduced by € 501 million, or 7 %, compared to 2019. The
decline was mainly attributable to cost reduction initiatives and synergies from efficiency measures including workforce
reductions. PB’s internal workforce declined to below 30,000 at year end 2020.

Assets under Management of € 493 billion increased by € 11 billion compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was
mainly attributable to € 16 billion net inflows and € 6 billion market appreciation, in part offset by a € 9 billion negative impact
from foreign exchange rate movements. Net inflows of € 16 billion during 2020 were almost entirely in investment products.




                                                                                                                                 23
Deutsche Bank                                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                               Results of Operations




Asset Management
                                                                                                                 2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                 2021           2020            2019       in € m.         in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues
Management Fees                                                         2,370           2,136           2,141         233            11           (5)            (0)
Performance and transaction fees                                          212              90             201         122           135         (111)           (55)
Other                                                                     126               3             (10)        123           N/M           13           N/M
Total net revenues                                                      2,708           2,229           2,332         478            21         (103)            (4)
Provision for credit losses                                                 5               2               1           3           148            1             59
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                 822             740             832          82             11         (92)           (11)
General and administrative expenses                                       840             763             851          77             10         (88)           (10)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                          0               0               0          (0)          N/M            0           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                    2              22              29         (20)           (92)         (6)           (22)
Total noninterest expenses                                              1,664           1,526           1,711         138              9        (185)           (11)
Noncontrolling interests                                                  223             157             152          66             42           5              4
Profit (loss) before tax                                                  816             544             468         272             50          76             16
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                    10               9              10           1             10          (0)            (5)
Assets under Management (in € bn)                                         928             793             768         135             17          25              3
Net flows (in € bn)                                                        48              30              25          17           N/M            5           N/M
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                        4,072           3,926           3,925         146              4           1              0
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.


2021
In 2021, despite the continuation of the global COVID-19 pandemic, all major equity indices traded at significantly higher
levels, with the U.S. dollar appreciating against the Euro. Overall growth in Assets under Management was driven by higher
net flows as well as favorable market conditions, resulting in higher revenues compared to 2020.

In 2021, AM reported a significantly higher profit before tax of € 816 million, an increase of € 272 million, or 50 %, compared
to € 544 million in the prior year, primarily driven by significantly higher revenues. Adjusted for transformation charges as well
as restructuring and severance expenses, profit before tax was € 840 million in 2021 compared to € 586 million in 2020.

Net revenues were € 2.7 billion, an increase of € 478 million, or 21 %, compared to the prior year.

Management fees were € 2.4 billion in 2021, higher by € 233 million, or 11 %, compared to the prior year mainly from higher
average assets under management throughout the year.

Performance and transaction fees of € 212 million in 2021 were significantly higher by € 122 million, or 135 %, compared to
the full year 2020, driven by an exceptional Multi Asset performance fee as well as increased real estate performance and
transaction fees.

Other revenues were € 126 million, an increase of € 123 million compared to 2020, primarily driven by the favorable change
in fair value of guaranteed products, an increase in investment income for illiquid products and higher contribution from the
investment in Harvest Fund Management Co. Limited.

Noninterest expenses were € 1.7 billion, an increase of € 138 million, or 9 %, compared to the prior year, driven by higher
compensation and benefits, increased professional services and IT costs driven by the core platform transformation combined
with higher service costs as a result of increasing assets under management.

Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges were € 1.6 billion in 2021, an increase of € 154 million, or 10 %, compared
to € 1.5 billion in 2020.

Assets under Management were € 928 billion, an increase of € 135 billion, or 17 %, versus December 31, 2020. The increase
was driven by a positive market performance of € 60 billion, favorable net flows development of € 48 billion and a positive
foreign exchange impact of € 26 billion. The net inflows were primarily driven by strong inflows into targeted growth areas of
Passive and Alternatives, as well as Active Cash, Active Fixed Income, Active Multi Asset and Active Systematic & Quantitative
Investments (SQI). Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) dedicated funds continued to attract strong net inflows,
representing 40 % of total net inflows.




                                                                                                                                                                  24
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Results of Operations




The following table provides the development of Assets under Management during 2021, broken down by product type as well
as the respective management fee margins:

                                                   Active       Active
                                      Active       Fixed         Multi            Active   Active                            Assets under
in € bn.                              Equity     Income         Asset               SQI     Cash    Passive   Alternatives   Management
Balance as of December 31, 2020         97          220            59                69      75        179            93             793
  Inflows                               16           47            13                14     510         95            14             708
  Outflows                             (16)         (43)           (9)              (11)   (504)       (69)           (9)           (660)
Net Flows                               (1)           5             4                 2       6         26             6              48
FX impact                                2            8             0                 0       4          8             3              26
Performance                             18           (4)            6                 5      (0)        25            11              60
Other                                   (0)          (0)            1                 0      (0)        (1)            1               1
Balance as of December 31, 2021        116          227            70                77      84        238           115             928
Management fee margin (in bps)          72           13            33                28       3         18            49              28


2020
In 2020, the market conditions were impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic. All major equity indices traded at significantly
lower levels in the second quarter, with a recovery in most markets by year end, and with the U.S. dollar depreciating against
the Euro. Overall net flows were positive combined with a growth in Assets under Management.

In 2020, AM reported a profit before tax of € 544 million, an increase of € 76 million, or 16 %, compared to € 468 million in the
prior year, primarily driven by lower expenses. Adjusted for transformation charges as well as restructuring and severance
expenses, profit before tax was € 586 million in 2020 compared to € 540 million in 2019.

Net revenues were € 2.2 billion, a decrease of € 103 million, or 4 %, compared to the prior year.

Management fees were € 2.1 billion in 2020, essentially flat compared to the prior year as effects from the positive market
performance and growth in Passive were partly offset by declining management fee margins.

Performance and transaction fees of € 90 million in 2020 were significantly lower by € 111 million, or 55 %, compared to the
full year 2019, predominantly due a non-recurring Alternatives and a Multi Asset performance fee recognized in 2019.

Other revenues were € 3 million compared to negative € 10 million in 2019 with both years negatively impacted by the fair
value of guaranteed products, combined with lower investment income, higher contribution from investment in Harvest Fund
Management Co. Limited and lower treasury funding charges in 2020.

Noninterest expenses were € 1.5 billion, a decrease of € 185 million, or 11 %, compared to the prior year, driven by a decline
in variable compensation, and efficiency initiatives combined with pandemic related savings such as travel and entertainment
and marketing costs. Noninterest expenses were also lower as the prior year included transformation charges relating to a
real estate impairment.

Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges were € 1.5 billion in 2020, a decrease of € 159 million, or 10 % compared to
€ 1.6 billion in 2019 as lower compensation expenses were supported by lower non-compensation costs.

Assets under Management were € 793 billion, an increase of € 25 billion, or 3 %, versus December 31, 2019. The increase
was driven by € 30 billion net inflows and € 24 billion related to favorable market development, mainly coming from the second
half of 2020, partly offset by negative € 26 billion foreign exchange effects. The net inflows were primarily driven by Passive
and Cash, and further supported by Alternatives. ESG dedicated funds continued to attract strong net inflows.

The following table provides the development of Assets under Management during 2020, broken down by product type as well
as the respective management fee margins:

                                                   Active       Active
                                      Active       Fixed         Multi            Active   Active                            Assets under
in € bn.                              Equity     Income         Asset               SQI     Cash    Passive   Alternatives   Management
Balance as of December 31, 2019          96         234             58               71      57        156            96             768
  Inflows                                21          47             16               19     503         85            12             703
  Outflows                              (19)        (54)           (18)             (22)   (483)       (68)           (8)           (673)
Net Flows                                 2          (7)            (2)              (3)     20         17             4              30
FX impact                                (2)         (9)            (0)              (0)     (4)        (7)           (3)            (26)
Performance                               3           7              1                1       0         13            (2)             24
Other                                    (1)         (6)             1                1       2          0            (1)             (3)
Balance as of December 31, 2020          97         220             59               69      75        179            93             793
Management fee margin (in bps)           72          13             34               28       4         19            50              28




                                                                                                                                       25
Deutsche Bank                                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                               Results of Operations




Capital Release Unit
                                                                                                                  2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                 from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                 2021           2020             2019       in € m.         in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues                                                                26           (225)            217          251           N/M         (442)          N/M
Provision for credit losses                                                (42)            29             (14)         (70)          N/M           43           N/M
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                 128             168              359         (40)           (24)       (191)           (53)
General and administrative expenses                                     1,306           1,774            2,898        (468)           (26)     (1,124)           (39)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                          0               0                0           0           N/M            0           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                   (2)              5              143          (7)          N/M         (139)           (97)
Total noninterest expenses                                              1,432           1,947            3,400        (515)           (26)     (1,453)           (43)
Noncontrolling interests                                                    –              (0)               1           0           N/M           (1)          N/M
Profit (loss) before tax                                               (1,364)         (2,200)          (3,170)        836            (38)        970            (31)
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                   132             198              259         (66)           (33)        (62)           (24)
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                          267             478              614        (211)           (44)       (136)           (22)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.


2021
The Capital Release Unit reported a loss before tax of € 1.4 billion in 2021, a reduction of 38 % versus a loss of € 2.2 billion
in 2020, primarily reflecting year on year cost reductions.

Net revenues were € 26 million in 2021, versus negative € 225 million in the prior year, as revenues from Prime Finance cost
recovery and the loan portfolio were only partly offset by funding, risk management and de-risking impacts.

Provision for credit losses were a net release of € 42 million, compared to a provision of € 29 million in 2020. The net release
was driven by the legacy real estate and shipping portfolios.

Noninterest expenses were € 1.4 billion, down 26 % year on year. This development was primarily driven by a 35 % reduction
in adjusted costs, reflecting lower internal service charges and bank levy allocations as well as lower direct expenses.

Leverage exposure was € 39 billion at year end 2021, down from € 72 billion at the end of 2020, and ahead of the division's
latest year-end 2022 target of € 51 billion. This progress partly reflected the transfer of Deutsche Bank’s Global Prime Finance
and Electronic Equities businesses to BNP Paribas, which was successfully completed by the end of 2021, in line with the
target timeline.

Risk weighted assets were € 28 billion at the end of 2021, down from € 34 billion at the end of 2020 and ahead of the bank’s
year-end 2022 target of € 32 billion.

Since its inception after the second quarter of 2019, CRU has reduced leverage exposure by 84 % and RWAs by 57 %, while
the loss before tax has been reduced by 57 % since 2019.




                                                                                                                                                                   26
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Results of Operations




2020
CRU incurred a loss before tax of € 2.2 billion in 2020, compared to a loss before tax of € 3.2 billion in 2019. This improve ment
versus the prior year was mainly driven by lower general and administrative expenses, lower compensation and benefits and
lower restructuring costs that more than offset the loss of revenues from the exit of the equities trading business.

Net revenues were negative € 225 million, a decrease of € 442 million compared to 2019. Negative revenues in 2020 represent
a full year of executing the strategy and were driven by de-risking, funding and hedging costs, partly offset by Prime Finance
cost recovery. The prior year included six months of operating revenue before the CRU formation.

Provision for credit losses were € 29 million, compared to a release of € 14 million in 2019. While the net release in 2019 was
dominated by a small number of specific events across several portfolios, 2020 saw additional provisions driven by the legacy
shipping portfolio.

Noninterest expenses were € 1.9 billion, a reduction of € 1.5 billion or 43 % compared to the prior year. Consistent with the
bank’s strategy, 2020 saw significantly lower restructuring costs of € 5 million compared to € 143 million incurred in the prior
year. Similarly, CRU incurred significantly lower transformation costs, with € 162 million incurred in 2020, compared to
transformation charges of € 510 million in 2019, mainly related to impairments of software.

Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges were € 1.7 billion, a decrease of € 862 million, or 33 % compared to 2019
following lower compensation and benefits costs across both fixed and variable compensation and reduced non-compensation
costs mainly driven by lower professional fees as well as communication and data services.

Leverage exposure was € 72 billion, € 8 billion ahead of the euro year-end target of € 80 billion. This represents a full-year
reduction of 43 % versus € 127 billion at the end of 2019.

Risk weighted assets (RWAs) were € 34 billion at the end of 2020, € 4 billion below the year-end target of € 38 billion. This
represents a full year reduction of € 11 billion, of which € 10 billion from Credit and Market Risk or a 48 % reduction from the
prior year period.




                                                                                                                               27
Deutsche Bank                                                          Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                     Results of Operations




Corporate & Other (C&O)
                                                                                                                  2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                 from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                         2021          2020      2019       in € m.         in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues                                                                      (339)        (534)      107           195           (36)        (641)         N/M
Provision for credit losses                                                          5           (4)       (0)            9          N/M            (3)         N/M
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                        3,012        3,217      3,406         (206)           (6)        (188)           (6)
General and administrative expenses                                             (2,008)      (2,652)    (2,916)         644           (24)         263            (9)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                                   0            0          0            0          N/M             0          N/M
Restructuring activities                                                            (0)           3         41           (3)         N/M           (38)          (93)
Total noninterest expenses                                                       1,004          568        531          436            77           37             7
Noncontrolling interests                                                          (206)        (169)      (173)         (37)           22            3            (2)
Profit (loss) before tax                                                        (1,143)        (929)      (251)        (213)           23         (679)         N/M
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                                30,064       29,587     30,672          477             2       (1,085)           (4)
N/M – not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.


2021
C&O reported a loss before tax of € 1.1 billion in 2021 compared to a loss before tax of € 929 million in 2020, primarily reflecting
higher noninterest expenses.

Net revenues were negative € 339 million in 2021, compared to negative € 534 million in 2020. Revenues related to valuation
and timing differences were € 158 million in 2021, compared to negative € 85 million in 2020. This improvement was driven
by the positive mark-to-market impact from interest rate hedging activities in connection with the bank’s funding arrangements
where hedge accounting cannot be applied. Net revenues relating to funding and liquidity were negative € 242 million in 2021,
versus negative € 235 million in 2020.

Noninterest expenses were € 1.0 billion in 2021, an increase of € 436 million, or 77 %, compared to 2020. 2021 noninterest
expenses included € 603 million of transformation related expenses booked in C&O, partly related to a contract settlement
and software impairments, partly triggered by the bank’s migration to the cloud technology. Expenses associated with
shareholder activities as defined in the OECD Transfer Pricing guidelines not allocated to the business divisions were € 460
million in 2021, versus € 403 million in 2020.

Noncontrolling interests are deducted from the profit before tax of the divisions and reversed in C&O. These amounted to €
206 million in 2021, compared to € 169 million in 2020, mainly related to DWS.

2020
C&O reported a loss before tax of € 929 million in 2020 compared to a loss before tax of € 251 million in 2019.

Net revenues were negative € 534 million in 2020, compared to € 107 million in 2019. Revenues related to valuation and
timing differences were negative € 85 million in 2020, compared to € 573 million in 2019. This was driven by the negative
mark-to-market impact of hedging activities in connection with the bank’s funding arrangements, against the backdrop of
tightening spreads on Deutsche Bank funding issuances leading to lower funding costs. Net revenues relating to funding and
liquidity were negative € 235 million in 2020, versus negative € 208 million in 2019.

Noninterest expenses were € 568 million in 2020, an increase of € 37 million, or 7 %, compared to 2019. 2020 noninterest
expenses included € 168 million higher than planned infrastructure expenses which are retained in C&O, compared to € 65
million lower than planned infrastructure expenses in 2019 as well as transformation charges primarily reflecting the bank’s
accelerated rationalization of its real estate footprint. Litigation expenses amounted to a credit of € 67 million in 2020, reflecting
a net provision release, compared to expenses of € 238 million in 2019. Expenses associated with shareholder activities as
defined in the OECD Transfer Pricing guidelines not allocated to the business divisions were € 403 million in 2020, down 15 %
compared to 2019. In 2019 positive effects were recognized from the release of legacy balances.

Noncontrolling interests are deducted from the profit before tax of the divisions and reversed in C&O. These amounted to €
169 million in 2020, compared to € 173 million in 2019, mainly related to DWS.




                                                                                                                                                                   28
Deutsche Bank                                                Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                           Financial Position




Financial Position
Assets
in € m.                                                                                                                Absolute   Change
(unless stated otherwise)                                                               Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020    Change       in %
Cash, central bank and interbank balances                                                     199,363      175,339     24,024         14
Central bank funds sold, securities purchased under resale agreements and
securities borrowed                                                                             8,432        8,533        (101)       (1)
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                         491,233      527,941     (36,709)       (7)
  Of which: Trading assets                                                                    102,396      107,929      (5,532)       (5)
  Of which: Positive market values from derivative financial instruments                      299,732      343,455     (43,723)      (13)
  Of which: Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit
  and loss                                                                                   88,965         76,121      12,844        17
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                            28,979         55,834     (26,856)      (48)
Loans at amortized cost                                                                     471,319        426,995      44,324        10
Remaining assets                                                                            124,668        130,617      (5,949)       (5)
  Of which: Brokerage and securities related receivables                                     71,495         74,564      (3,070)       (4)
Total assets                                                                              1,323,993      1,325,259      (1,266)       (0)



Liabilities and Equity
in € m.                                                                                                                Absolute   Change
(unless stated otherwise)                                                               Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020    Change       in %
Deposits                                                                                      603,750      568,031     35,719          6
Central bank funds purchased, securities sold under repurchase
agreements and securities loaned                                                                772          4,023¹     (3,251)      (81)
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                  400,857        419,199     (18,342)       (4)
  Of which: Trading liabilities                                                              54,718         44,316      10,403        23
  Of which: Negative market values from derivative financial instruments                    287,108        327,775     (40,666)      (12)
  Of which: Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss            58,468         46,582      11,886        26
Other short-term borrowings                                                                   4,034          3,553         481        14
Long-term debt                                                                              144,485        149,163      (4,679)       (3)
Remaining liabilities                                                                       102,066        119,094¹    (17,028)      (14)
  Of which: Brokerage and securities related payables                                        70,165         79,810      (9,645)      (12)
Total liabilities                                                                         1,255,962      1,263,063      (7,100)       (1)
Total equity                                                                                 68,030         62,196       5,834         9
Total liabilities and equity                                                              1,323,993      1,325,259      (1,266)       (0)
1
    December 31, 2020 numbers have been updated.



Movements in Assets and Liabilities
As of December 31, 2021, the total balance sheet of € 1.3 trillion slightly decreased by € 1.3 billion (or 0.1 %) compared to
year-end 2020.

Cash, central bank and interbank balances increased by € 24.0 billion, primarily driven by proceeds from selected sales of
financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income of € 26.9 billion, as a result of rebalancing of our strate gic
liquidity reserve in light of market conditions.

Central bank funds sold, securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed measured at amortized cost
and under non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit and loss increased by € 14.8 billion, driven by
higher client activity under current market conditions in our Investment Bank. Corresponding liabilities increased by
€ 7.4 billion.

Trading assets decreased by € 5.5 billion, primarily due to unwinding of equity securities long positions as a result of the sale
of our Prime Finance franchise to BNP Paribas. Trading liabilities increased by € 10.4 billion, mainly attributable to increased
client demand and market opportunities.

Positive and negative market values of derivative financial instruments decreased by € 43.7 billion and € 40.7 billion,
respectively, mainly due to de-risking in our Capital Release Unit and interest rate products as changes in interest rate curves
were inversely correlated to changes in mark-to-market values. These decreases were partly offset by increases in foreign
exchange rate products in the Fixed Income & Currencies business in our Investment Bank due to higher trading volumes.




                                                                                                                                       29
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Financial Position




Loans at amortized cost increased by € 44.3 billion, primarily driven by strong underlying growth and a large episodic financing
that is expected to reverse in the first quarter 2022 in our Investment Bank, strong growth in mortgage and collateralized
lending in our Private Bank as well as solid lending demand in Corporate Treasury Services in our Corporate Bank. Deposits
increased by € 35.7 billion, mainly from targeted growth in our Corporate Bank, organic growth in the Private Bank as well as
short term wholesale funding supporting financing needs towards year-end.

Long-term debt decreased by € 4.7 billion, primarily driven by maturities and buy-backs of debt issuances, partly offset by
drawings under the third TLTRO refinancing program of the ECB.

Remaining assets decreased by € 5.9 billion primarily due to a decrease in assets held for sale due to the transfer of our Prime
Finance franchise to BNP Paribas. Remaining liabilities decreased by € 17.0 billion primarily driven by lower brokerage
payables in line with lower derivatives positions and a decrease in liabilities held for sale due to the aforementioned transfer.

The overall movement of the balance sheet included an increase of € 35.6 billion due to foreign exchange rate movements,
mainly driven by a strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Euro. The effects from foreign exchange rate movements are
embedded in the movement of the balance sheet line items discussed in this section.


Liquidity
Total High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) as defined by the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 and amended by
Regulation (EU) 2018/1620 were € 207 billion as of December 31, 2021, a € 6 billion decrease from € 213 billion as of
December 31, 2020. The Group maintains additional highly liquid central bank eligible assets, not qualifying as HQLA or
subject to transfer restrictions under the HQLA definition. These additional liquid assets were € 34 billion as at the end of
December 31, 2021, such that the Group’s total Liquidity Reserves were € 241 billion. The decrease is primarily driven by
increased lending activity and matured capital market issuances partially offset by additional participation in the ECB’s TLTRO
and higher deposits. The Liquidity Coverage Ratio was 133 % at the end fourth quarter of 2021, a surplus to regulatory
requirements of € 52 billion as compared to 145 % as at the end of fourth quarter of 2020, a surplus to regulatory requirements
of € 66 billion.


Equity
Total equity as of December 31, 2021 increased by € 5.8 billion compared to December 31, 2020. This change was driven by
a number of factors including the issuance of additional equity components (Additional Tier 1 securities, treated as equity in
accordance with IFRS) of € 2.5 billion (€ 1.25 billion each on May 9, 2021 and November 16, 2021). Further contributing to
the increase were the profit reported for the period of € 2.5 billion, a positive impact from foreign currency translation of
€ 1.1 billion, net of tax, mainly resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro, as well as remeasurement
gains related to defined benefit plans of € 592 million, net of tax. This was partly offset by unrealized net losses of financial
assets at fair value through other comprehensive income of € 398 million, net of tax and coupons paid on additional equity
components of € 363 million.


Own Funds
Our CRR/CRD Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital as of December 31, 2021 increased by € 1.6 billion to € 46.5 billion,
compared to € 44.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. The CRR/CRD Risk-weighted assets (RWA) increased by € 22.7 billion to
€ 351.6 billion as of December 31, 2021, compared to € 329.0 billion as of December 31, 2020. Due to this increase in CRR/CRD
RWA, the CRR/CRD CET 1 capital ratio as of December 31, 2021 decreased to 13.2 % compared to 13.6 % in December 31,
2020.

Our CRR/CRD Tier 1 capital as of December 31, 2021 amounted to € 55.4 billion, consisting of a CRR/CRD CET 1 capital of
€ 46.5 billion and CRR/CRD Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital of € 8.9 billion. The CRR/CRD Tier 1 capital was € 3.6 billion higher
than at the end of December 31, 2020, driven by an increase in CRR/CRD CET 1 capital of € 1.6 billion and an increase in
CRR/CRD AT1 capital of € 2.0 billion since year end 2020. The CRR/CRD Tier 1 capital ratio as of December 31, 2021 remains
unchanged at 15.7 % compared to December 31, 2020.

Our CRR/CRD Total Regulatory capital as of December 31, 2021 amounted to € 62.7 billion compared to € 58.7 billion at the end
of December 31, 2020. The CRR/CRD Total capital increase was driven by an increase in CRR/CRD Tier 1 capital of € 3.6 billion
and an increase in CRR/CRD Tier 2 capital of € 0.4 billion since year end 2020. The CRR/CRD Total capital ratio as of
December 31, 2021 remains unchanged at 17.8 % compared to December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                                              30
Deutsche Bank                                    Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                               Liquidity and Capital Resources




Liquidity and Capital Resources
For a detailed discussion of our liquidity risk management, see our Risk Report.


Credit Ratings
Deutsche Bank is rated by Moody’s Deutschland GmbH (“Moody’s”), S&P Global Ratings UK Limited (“S&P”), Fitch Ratings
– a branch of Fitch Ratings Ireland Limited (“Fitch”), and DBRS Ratings GmbH (“DBRS Morningstar”, together with Moody’s,
S&P and Fitch, the “Rating Agencies”).

Moody’s, Fitch and DBRS Morningstar are established in the European Union and have been registered in accordance with
Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of September 16, 2009, as amended, on credit
rating agencies (“CRA Regulation”). With respect to S&P, the credit ratings are endorsed by S&P’s office in Ireland (S&P
Global Ratings Europe Limited) in accordance with Article 4(3) of the CRA Regulation.

Credit Ratings Development

The Rating Agencies recognized the continued execution progress the bank has made towards its targets over the course of
2021, specifically the improvement in profitability and reduced credit loss provisions, despite the challenging macro-economic
environment. This was reflected in credit rating upgrades by Moody’s, Fitch and S&P, and an outlook revision from DBRS
Morningstar over the course of the year.

On 4th August 2021, Moody’s upgraded all of Deutsche Bank’s ratings by one notch. The bank’s long- and short-term deposit
ratings have been upgraded to A2/P-1 from A3/P-2 and its long-term senior unsecured (senior preferred) debt ratings have
been upgraded to A2 from A3. The outlook on the long-term deposit and senior unsecured (senior preferred) debt ratings has
been changed to positive from ratings under review. In addition, the bank’s junior senior unsecured (senior non -preferred)
debt ratings were raised to Baa2 from Baa3 as well as its Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) to baa3 from ba1. Moody’s
highlighted Deutsche Bank’s continued progress towards meeting its medium-term targets, in particular through the
improvement in profitability. Moody’s believes that the bank will continue to grow revenues and earnings while simultaneously
decreasing the cost base and maintaining a prudent and well controlled risk appetite.

The upgrades followed the placement of Deutsche Bank’s ratings on review for upgrade by Moody’s on 17th May 2021. This
move took account of the bank’s swift and pronounced progress towards its objective of achieving a more balanced and
sustainable business model and the unchanged solid capital and liquidity buffers.

On 23rd September 2021, Fitch upgraded all of Deutsche Bank’s long-term ratings as well as the Derivative Counterparty
Rating (DCR) and the Viability Rating (VR) by one notch. The bank’s Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) was upgraded
to BBB+ from BBB, the VR to bbb+ from bbb and the DCR and long-term deposit and senior preferred debt ratings to A- from
BBB+. The outlook on the Long-Term IDR was kept positive. The upgrades reflected good progress and increasingly
manageable challenges arising from the transformation process, which Fitch expects to continue to be on track in 2022. In
addition, Fitch highlighted a strengthened business model and an improving franchise, sound asset quality, funding and
liquidity as well as adequate capitalization.

This rating action followed the revision of Deutsche Bank’s outlook to positive from negative by Fitch on 25th January 2021.
The revision reflected the bank’s restructuring progress including maintaining the cost trajectory required to reach near- and
longer-term targets, reducing non-core businesses while avoiding revenue attrition in the core bank, and maintaining adequate
and above-target capitalization.

On 9th November 2021, S&P upgraded Deutsche Bank’s long-term Issuer Credit Rating to A- from BBB+. The bank’s senior
unsecured (senior preferred) debt rating was also raised to A- from BBB+. In addition, S&P increased the long- and short-term
resolution counterparty ratings to A/A-1 from A-/A-2. The upgrades reflected Deutsche Bank’s disciplined execution of its
transformation program delivering a more focused and profitable business model, while the balance sheet remains resilient.
The revision of the outlook to stable indicates that the bank is well placed to continue delivering its strategy and strengthening
its performance.




                                                                                                                               31
Deutsche Bank                                                        Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                   Liquidity and Capital Resources




The upgrades followed a revision of the outlook for Deutsche Bank’s long-term Issuer Credit Rating to positive from negative
by S&P on 26th February 2021. At the same time, S&P raised the issue ratings on the bank’s Additional Tier 1 hybrid
instruments to BB- from B+. S&P highlighted the demonstration of robust execution of the deep phase of operational
restructuring and stressed the anticipation that benefits of the restructuring will emerge over the next 12-24 months that would
yield business stability and lift Deutsche Bank’s performance more into line with higher rated European peers.

On 1st July 2021, DBRS Morningstar revised its outlook on all of Deutsche Bank’s long-term ratings to stable from negative.
DBRS Morningstar reflected the progress made in de-risking the bank and in executing the transformation plan, which has
stabilized the franchise. In addition, the outlook change highlighted the achievements made on the expense side, while
maintaining a well-managed credit and market risk profile, and solid balance sheet fundamentals.

All Agencies will closely monitor further progress made towards the bank’s 2022 targets, with a focus on further improvements
in profitability. Moreover, the Agencies are looking for sustainable profitability beyond 2022, while maintaining a prudent risk
management and strong asset quality.

Potential Impacts of Ratings Downgrades

Deutsche Bank calculates both the contractual and hypothetical potential impact of a one-notch and two-notch downgrade by
the rating agencies (Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch) on its liquidity position, and includes this impact in its daily liquidity
stress test and Liquidity Coverage Ratio calculations. The LCR and liquidity stress test results by scenario are disclosed
separately.

In terms of contractual obligations, the hypothetical impact on derivative liquidity stress outflows of a one-notch downgrade
across the three Rating Agencies Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch amounts to approximately € 0.2 billion, mainly driven
by increased contractual derivatives funding and/or margin requirements. The hypothetical impact of a two-notch downgrade
amounts to approximately € 0.3 billion, mainly driven by increased contractual derivatives funding and/or margin requirements.

The above analysis assumes a simultaneous downgrade by the three rating agencies Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch
that would consequently reduce Deutsche Bank’s funding capacity in the stated amounts. This specific contractual analysis
feeds into the bank’s idiosyncratic liquidity stress test scenario.

The actual impact of a downgrade to Deutsche Bank is unpredictable and may differ from potential funding and liquidity impacts
described above.

Selected rating categories
                                                                                                    Counterparty     Senior preferred/             Senior
                                                                                                            Risk            Deposits¹       non-preferred²    Short-term rating
Moody’s Investors Service, New York                                                                      A2 (cr)                   A2              Baa2                    P-1
Standard & Poor’s, New York                                                                                    -                   A-              BBB-                    A-2
Fitch Ratings, New York                                                                                 A- (dcr)                   A-             BBB+                      F2
DBRS, Toronto                                                                                           A (high)              A (low)         BBB (high)             R-1 (low)
1
    Defined as senior unsecured bank rating at Moody‘s, senior unsecured debt at Standard & Poor’s, senior preferred debt rating at Fitch and senior debt rating at DBRS. All
    agencies provide separate ratings for deposits and ‘senior preferred’ debt, but at the same rating level.
2
    Defined as junior senior debt rating at Moody's, as senior subordinated debt at Standard & Poor’s and as senior non-preferred debt at Fitch and DBRS.


Each rating reflects the view of the rating agency only at the time the rating was issued, and each rating should be separately
evaluated and the rating agencies should be consulted for any explanations of the significance of their ratings. The rating
agencies can change their ratings at any time if they believe that circumstances so warrant. The long-term credit ratings should
not be viewed as recommendations to buy, hold or sell Deutsche Bank’s securities.




                                                                                                                                                                                32
Deutsche Bank                                                         Operating and Financial Review
Annual Report 2021                                                    Liquidity and Capital Resources




Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
Cash payment requirements outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
                                                                                                                                            Payment due
Contractual obligations
                                                                                                                                               by period
in € m.                                                                         Total        Less than 1 year   1–3 years   3–5 years   More than 5 years
Long-term debt obligations¹                                                154,068                   51,378      40,028      31,278              31,383
Trust preferred securities1,2                                                  529                      529           0           0                   0
Long-term financial liabilities designated at fair value
through profit or loss3                                                       3,809                   1,225          574       1,288                722
Future cash outflows not reflected in the
                                                                                                          10         163         376              5,884
measurement of Lease liabilities4                                            6,433
Lease liabilities1                                                           4,515                      682         875         875               2,082
Purchase obligations                                                         4,045                      547       1,649       1,678                 171
Long-term deposits¹                                                         22,188                        0       7,733       4,462               9,994
Other long-term liabilities                                                  1,467                    1,101         284           2                  79
Total                                                                      197,054                   55,474      51,306      39,959              50,315
1
    Includes interest payments.
2
    Contractual payment date or first call date.
3
    Long-term debt and long-term deposits designated at fair value through profit or loss.
4
    For further detail please refer to Note 22 “Leases”.


Purchase obligations for goods and services include future payments for, among other things, information technology services
and facility management. Some figures above for purchase obligations represent minimum contractual payments and actual
future payments may be higher. Long-term deposits exclude contracts with a remaining maturity of less than one year. Under
certain conditions future payments for some long-term financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss may
occur earlier. See the following notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information: Note 5 “Net Interest
Income and Net Gains (Losses) on Financial Assets/Liabilities at Fair Value through Profit or Loss”, Note 22 “Leases”, Note 26
“Deposits” and Note 30 “Long-Term Debt and Trust Preferred Securities”.




                                                                                                                                                       33
Deutsche Bank                                                      Outlook
Annual Report 2021                                                 The Global Economy




Outlook
The following section provides an overview of our outlook for the Group and our business divisions for the financial year 2022.
The outlook for the global economy and banking industry in the following chapter reflects our general expectations regarding
future economic and industry developments. Economic assumptions used in our models are laid out separately in the
respective sections.



The Global Economy
The Global Economy Outlook
Economic growth (in %)¹                  2022²         2021     Main driver
Global Economy                                                  2022 started with a positive momentum in the global economy, which is expected to continue
GDP                                        4.2           6.0    moderately over the year ahead. Growth throughout 2022 is expected to be supported by a
Inflation                                  5.7           4.1    combination of an ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and fiscal stimulus programs.
                                                                Global inflation is expected to increase noticeably in 2022. Central banks are expected to tighten
                                                                monetary policy.
    Of which:
    Developed countries                                         As the Omicron wave of COVID-19 infections subsides, the economic recovery of developed
      GDP                                  3.6           5.1    economies is expected to regain momentum. Economies are expected to benefit from robust
      Inflation                            4.7           3.2    global trade and strengthening domestic demand in 2022 as supply chain constraints ease and
                                                                excess savings are utilized. Sustained elevated inflation rates are likely to prompt central banks
                                                                in developed countries to tighten monetary policy.
    Emerging markets                                            The recovery in emerging markets is likely to slow down somewhat in 2022, although the
     GDP                                   4.6           6.6    economies are expected to benefit from robust export demand and in particular, the Chinese
     Inflation                             6.4           4.6    economy is expected to recover. Emerging markets are expected to face several challenges in
                                                                2022, including the large gap in vaccinations compared to developed economies, stickier inflation
                                                                profiles, weaker growth and high foreign currency denominated debt.
Eurozone Economy                                                The Eurozone economy experienced a sluggish start to 2022 due to supply bottlenecks and
GDP                                        3.8           5.2    surging energy prices. However, a significant rebound is expected from spring onwards,
Inflation                                  4.7           2.6    supported by a normalization of the pandemic situation due to high vaccination rates, pent-up
                                                                demand, a robust labor market and impulses from the EU Recovery Fund. These factors are likely
                                                                to prevent a stronger decline in inflation. The European Central Bank is expected to end net
                                                                purchases under the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program by the end of March 2022 and
                                                                start to raise policy rates in the third quarter of 2022.
    Of which: German                                            The German economy is expected to see balanced growth in 2022, driven by acceleration in the
    economy                                                     domestic and more externally driven sectors of the economy. After a weak start due to a renewed
      GDP                                  4.0           2.8    increase in COVID-19 infections, GDP growth is expected to pick up strongly during 2022. Robust
      Inflation                            4.3           3.2    labor market, pent-up demand and mitigating supply chain constraints should support growth
                                                                momentum. Inflation is expected to remain elevated due to higher energy prices and likely recede
                                                                only gradually in the course of 2022. The government aims to increase public investment for
                                                                digitization and the transition to carbon neutrality.
U.S. Economy                                                    Consumer spending will continue to be an important driver of the U.S. economy's growth
GDP                                        3.6           5.7    momentum in 2022, supported by improved household finances due to excess savings, continued
Inflation                                  5.9           4.7    normalization of services spending and a recovery in car sales. The Government is expected to
                                                                provide further fiscal stimulus. With the labor market at full employment and inflation elevated, the
                                                                Federal Reserve is expected to tighten its monetary policy stance and raise interest rates six
                                                                times in 2022. Recent geopolitical development could lead to significantly higher energy and
                                                                commodity prices.
Japanese Economy                                                The Japanese economy is expected to accelerate in 2022, supported by widespread vaccination
GDP                                        2.3           1.7    against COVID-19, the easing of supply chain constraints and the decline of COVID-19 infection
Inflation                                  1.0          (0.2)   rates in Southeast Asia. The government and the Bank of Japan have become more aligned in
                                                                coordinating policy. The Bank of Japan is expected to maintain its accommodative stance while
                                                                being mindful of policy spill overs.
Asian Economy³                                                  Asian economies are expected to be supported by robust export growth and a recovery in
GDP                                        5.5           7.1    domestic demand. Although peaking in some regions, inflationary pressures are likely to remain
Inflation                                  3.1           2.1    high. Few Asian central banks are expected to raise rates earlier in 2022.
   Of which: Chinese                                            The Chinese economy is expected to regain momentum during the year as fiscal and monetary
   Economy                                                      policy has become supportive again and the impact of COVID-19 is likely to ease in 2022.
     GDP                                   5.1           8.1    Economic momentum is also expected to be strengthened by government support for green
     Inflation                             2.3           0.9    investment, a recovery in property sales and easing supply constraints. Inflation is expected to
                                                                pick up, especially in the second half of the year. The People's Bank of China is likely to actively
                                                                promote lending for green investment projects and ensure sufficient lending to the real estate
                                                                sector.
1
    Annual Real GDP Growth (% YoY). Sources: National Authorities unless stated otherwise.
2
    Sources: Deutsche Bank Research.
3
    Includes China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam; excludes Japan.




                                                                                                                                                                 34
Deutsche Bank                                      Outlook
Annual Report 2021                                 The Banking Industry




There a are number of risks to our global economic outlook. Ongoing challenges from COVID-19 due to potentially more
severe variants or vaccines becoming less effective could considerably dampen economic momentum. Growing government
debt burdens could also impact certain economies. If inflation fails to recede, it will lead central banks to a more aggressive
tightening stance, potentially causing a sharply negative reaction in financial markets and most likely a significant economic
recession. Trade tensions could negatively impact the global economic outlook. Additionally, rising geopolitical tensions could
create further uncertainty. On February 24, 2022, Russia commenced large-scale military action against Ukraine. In response
to the Russian military action against Ukraine, the West has moved to impose broad-based sanctions targeting Russia,
including but not limited to major Russian banks, certain other companies, Russian parliament members and certain members
of the Russian elite and their families but also banning primary / secondary trading of sovereign debt and other select
securities. Secondary effects of these developments, for example the cost and sufficiency of energy supplies in Western
Europe and the economic impact of various scenarios, are hard to predict and could be severe. Where possible and to the
extent of our current knowledge, these impacts, including potential Russian countermeasures, have been considered in our
portfolio strategy. We are monitoring the developments closely and utilizing dedicated governance structures including Global
and Regional Crisis Management as and when required.



The Banking Industry
The performance of the global banking industry could improve further in 2022, subject to the subsiding of the COVID-19 pandemic
and receding supply shortages in many industries. Given the positive macroeconomic outlook, loan growth could pick up again,
interest rates are expected to rise, loan loss provisions may stay relatively low, and the capital markets environment might remain
broadly favorable even though momentum is likely to slow compared to 2021. Given the considerable monetary policy uncertainty,
market volatility could increase, and policy surprises could impact asset prices. Strong banking sector profitability may result in
substantial capital returns to shareholders. Political and regulatory measures to advance the transition to a more sustainable
economy and financial system are expected to increasingly shape banks’ and asset managers’ financing and investment
decisions and reporting. A partly disappointing performance in vaccine uptake and distribution and an increasing inflation could
somewhat dampened growth prospects.

In Europe, revenues should benefit from the ECB’s gradual exit from its crisis tools, particularly the trimming of asset purchases
in the context of Quantitative Easing and potential signals of looming higher interest rates. Likewise, stronger private consumption
as well as sustained robust government spending and corporate investment may have a positive impact on bank revenues. On
the flip side, the most favorable funding conditions under the ECB’s TLTRO III program will expire.

In the U.S., net interest income could receive a boost from several rate hikes by the Federal Reserve, similar to the beginning of
the last cycle in 2015/2016. At least initially, the prospect of higher rates could also stimulate credit demand, both with respect to
loans and corporate bonds.

In most of Asia, banks could also benefit from rising interest rates and therefore margins, as well as, from a recovery in domestic
consumption. In China, the picture is probably going to be more mixed, with a drag from a moderate easing of monetary policy,
but tailwinds from fiscal expansion and a pickup in overall economic growth.

After the United Kingdom (UK) left the European Union (EU), the immediate future of their economic relationship is governed
by a trade agreement, which does not cover cross-border financial services. Such services will be governed by either local
regulatory requirements or ad-hoc agreements between regulatory bodies in the two jurisdictions. The Bank of England and
the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the European Securities
and Markets Authority (ESMA) concerning the supervision of market infrastructure entities. A MOU establishing a structured
framework for regulatory cooperation and the process for adoption, suspension and withdrawal of equivalence decisions
between the UK and EU has been agreed in principle but is yet to be ratified by the European Parliament. To date, only two
time-limited equivalence decisions have been made by the EU. The first, which address UK central securities depositories,
expired on June 30, 2021, and the second addressing UK central counterparties, expires on June 30, 2022, but is expected
to be extended further following a November 2021 announcement from the European Commission (EC).

In relation to the European Commission legislative proposal from October 27, 2021, European policymakers will discuss
changes to prudential and resolution regulation aimed at implementing the Final Basel III package, with particular focus on
risk models. The negotiation for the final package is expected to take several years.




                                                                                                                                  35
Deutsche Bank                                                      Outlook
Annual Report 2021                                                 The Deutsche Bank Group




The Deutsche Bank Group
In July 2019, we announced a strategic transformation of Deutsche Bank to re-focus on delivering sustainable profitability and
improved returns for our shareholders. The statements included in this section cover the expected performance against our
key performance indicators for the financial year 2022.

Despite the remaining challenges associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertainties associated with the Russian
military action against Ukraine, we intend to continue executing our strategy in a disciplined manner in 2022 and beyond,
focusing on improving sustainable profitability by growing revenues in our Core Bank while remaining disciplined on costs and
capital. We continue to work towards our 2022 financial targets, supported by our ongoing strategy execution.

Our key performance indicators including our financial targets are shown in the table below:


Key Performance Indicators
                                                                                                                                               Targets                 KPI
Key Performance Indicators                                                                                          Dec 31, 2021                  2022                2025
Group Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity1                                                                          3.8 %               8.0 %         Above 10 %
Core Bank Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity2                                                                      6.4 %         Above 9.0 %                   N/A
Compound annual growth rate of revenues from 2021 to 20253                                                                   N/A                 N/A          3.5 to 4.5 %
                                                                                                                                                                Less than
Cost/income ratio4                                                                                                        84.6 %             70.0 %                62.5 %
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio5                                                                                       13.2 %       Above 12.5 %                ~ 13 %
Leverage ratio (fully loaded)6                                                                                             4.9 %             ~4.5 %          Above 4.5 %
1   Based on Net Income attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial
    Measures” of this report.
2
    Based on Core Bank Net Income attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP
    Financial Measures” of this report.
3
    Based on Net revenues.
4
    Noninterest expenses as a percentage of total net revenues, which are defined as net interest income before provision for credit losses plus noninterest income.
5
    Further detail on the calculation of this ratio is provided in the Risk Report.
6
    On September 17, 2020, ECB announced its decision to exercise its regulatory discretion declaring exceptional circumstances. This measure allows banks to exclude certain
    eligible central bank balances from the leverage exposure. Banks will benefit from the relief measure until March 31, 2022, when CRR2 comes into force. Leverage Ratio
    excluding this effect was 4.5 % as on December 31, 2021.


In 2022, we are working towards to achieving our financial targets, principally the Post-tax Return on Average Tangible
Shareholders’ Equity target of 8 % for the Group and above 9 % for our Core Bank, by building on the progress made since
we started our strategic transformation in 2019. All forward-looking projections below are based on January 31, 2022 foreign
exchange rates.

In 2022, Group and Core Bank revenues are expected to be slightly higher compared to the prior year. We expect to earn
between € 26 billion to € 27 billion of revenues at Group level, exceeding our previous 2022 revenue ambitions, supported by
the resilience and growth potential of our core businesses and continued business momentum. In the Investment Bank, we
expect revenues to decline slightly, primarily driven by Origination and Advisory, as industry volumes and fee pools normalize
from the levels seen in 2021. Growth in volumes and fee income in the Corporate Bank should be supported by a further roll
out of deposit repricing and an improved interest rate environment. In Private Bank, higher revenues are expected mainly due
to continued business growth in investment and loan products, the declining of the impact of the BGH ruling and an expected
gain on the sale of the financial advisors’ network in Italy upon closing. In Asset Management, revenues are expected to be
essentially flat assuming market stabilization.

We are managing the Group’s cost base towards our cost/income ratio target. We remain highly focused on cost discipline
and delivery of the initiatives underway. We expect noninterest expenses in 2022 to be lower than in 2021, largely driven by
significantly lower transformation-related effects. From 2019 to 2021, we have recognized € 8.4 billion transformation related
effects. This represents 97 % of the anticipated impact for the years 2019 to 2022. Adjusted costs excluding transformation
charges are expected to be slightly lower in 2022. We expect the cost development to benefit from IT efficiencies resulting
from the execution of IT strategies, run-rate benefits of headcount reductions in the previous year and front-to-back alignment
as well as savings in Infrastructure functions from process optimization and automation. These effects will be potentially offset
by continued investments in controls, inflationary effects and the anticipated impact of foreign exchange rate changes.

We expect provisions for credit losses to be significantly higher in 2022 compared to the previous year, reflecting more
normalized levels of provisioning. The low level of provisions in 2021 was supported by a strong economic recovery,
particularly following the easing of various pandemic related restrictions during the year, recoveries, and a net reduction in
management overlays. Amid an anticipated slowdown of macro-economic growth in 2022 from the exceptionally strong levels
in the previous year, we therefore expect credit loss provision to be around 20 basis points as a percentage of our anticipated
average loans for the full year 2022.. Our credit portfolio quality remains strong, and we are well positioned to manage
emerging risks including geopolitical uncertainties, supply chain disruptions and expected policy tightening. Further detail on
the calculation of expected credit losses (ECL) is provided in the section ‘Risk Report’ in this report.


                                                                                                                                                                          36
Deutsche Bank                                     Outlook
Annual Report 2021                                The Deutsche Bank Group




We expect our Common Equity Tier 1 ratio (CET 1 ratio) by year end 2022 to remain essentially flat compared to 2021. We
expect regulatory decisions on models to impact our risk weighted assets (RWA) through the year, in particular for credit risk,
driving some CET1 ratio variability. We expect business growth to increase our RWA. Overall, RWA is expected to be slightly
higher. For 2022, we remain committed to maintaining our CET1 ratio above our external target of 12.5 %.

We expect our Leverage exposure by year-end 2022 to be higher than 2021. Group leverage exposure is expected to increase
as the temporary exclusion of certain Euro system central bank balances is expected to expire in the second quarter of 2022.
Consequently, we expect our Leverage ratio (fully loaded) to be slightly lower but consistent with our Leverage ratio target of
approximately 4.5 % by year-end 2022.Our transformation progress and financial performance in 2021 allows us to resume
dividend payments in 2022. We intend to propose a dividend of € 0.20 per share in respect of the financial year 2021, payable
in 2022, and will complement the distribution to shareholders with share buybacks of € 300 million in the first half of 2022. We
are committed to delivering sustainably growing cash dividends and returning excess capital to shareholders through share
buybacks that is over and above what is required to support profitable growth and upcoming regulatory changes over time,
subject to regulatory approval and shareholder authorization and meeting German corporate law requirements. To that end,
subject to meeting our strategic targets, the Management Board intends to grow the cash dividend per share by 50 % p.a. in
the next 3 years, starting from € 0.20 per share for the financial year 2021, which would translate into approximately € 3.3
billion of cumulative dividend payments by 2025 with respect to financial years 2021-2024. In relation to the financial year
2024 we intend to achieve a total payout ratio of 50 % from a combination of dividends paid and share buybacks executed in
2025; and we intend to maintain a 50 % total payout ratio in subsequent years. In addition to the already announced share
buyback in 2022 of € 300 million, meeting our current financial aspirations would therefore support the previously announced
cumulative distributions to shareholders in the form of dividends paid or share buybacks executed in the total amount of € 5
billion in respect of financial years 2021-2024. In addition, should we successfully execute our financial and strategic plans
through 2025, total implied cumulative distributions of approximately € 8 billion in respect of financial years 2021-2025 would
be achievable. Our ambition to return capital to shareholders is further underpinned by our aim to maintain a robust Common
Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital ratio of approximately 13 %, i.e. a CET 1 ratio of no less than 200 basis points above our
Maximum Distributable Amount (MDA) threshold we currently assume to prevail over time. By the nature of our business, we
are involved in litigation, arbitration and regulatory proceedings and investigations in Germany and in a number of jurisdictions
outside Germany, especially in the U.S. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties. While we have resolved a number of
important legal matters and made progress on others, we expect the litigation and enforcement environment to remain
challenging. For 2022, and with a caveat that forecasting litigation charges is subject to many uncertainties, we expect litigation
charges, net, to be lower than the levels experienced in the previous year.

On February 24, 2022, Russia commenced large-scale military action against Ukraine. In response to this action, the West
has moved to impose broad-based sanctions (including asset-freeze / blocking sanctions) targeting Russia, including but not
limited to major Russian banks, the Russian Central Bank, certain other companies, Russian parliament members and certain
members of the Russian elite and their families but also banning primary / secondary trading of sovereign debt and other
select securities as well as announced to disconnect select Russian banks from SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank
Financial Telecommunication). It is possible that additional sanctions may be imposed, including additional or new asset-
freeze / blocking sanctions of individuals (SDNs) or companies (including further systemically important corporates and banks),
prohibition of conversion of RUB, e.g., into USD, EUR or GBP, and disconnection of Russia from SWIFT. Sanctions are subject
to rapid change and it is also possible that new direct or indirect secondary sanctions could be imposed by the United States
or other jurisdictions without warning as a result of developments. Considering the sanctions announced in the wake of
February 24th, we are looking at an unprecedented amount of sanctions measures, not all of which are fully aligned across
jurisdictions and therefore further increase operational complexity and risk of making errors in managing day-to-day business
activities within the rapidly evolving sanctions environment. Generally, enhanced Russia sanctions result in further increased
complexity of our control environment and, the more clients are impacted, the more challenging it could be to completely wind -
down cases within the timeframe provided by licenses or authorizations. New sanctions as well as countermeasures by the
Russian government could also result in differences between the local application / implementation of relevant requirements
by Deutsche Bank Moscow and the Deutsche Bank Group (as Deutsche Bank Moscow would have to adhere to local law).
Subsequently, this would create conflict of law situations and certain exemptions would have to be applied. Furthermore,
Deutsche Bank is utilizing inhouse technology resources in Russia, which contribute to the development of a number of the
Bank’s critical applications. We are subject to the risk that our ability to utilize these technology resources could be impa ired
or lost, for instance due to sanctions from the West, Russian state-initiated actions or management actions. The heightened
risk of sanctions, including Russian countermeasures, has been considered in our portfolio strategy. We are monitoring the
developments closely and utilising dedicated governance structures including Global and Regional Crisis Management as and
when required. We have also seen increased cyber-attacks, which may pose direct and indirect risks to us. The downside
impact of the ongoing situation concerning Ukraine, from both a financial and non-financial risk perspective will depend on
how the current crisis will unfold further and may impact our ability to meet our stated targets. The regulatory environment or
other restrictions including sanctions imposed may result in our business activities related to Russia becoming unviable or t hat
we lose control over our assets. Despite the business continuity and crisis management policies currently in place, the conflict
also poses challenges related to personnel as well as loss of business continuity, which may disrupt our business and lead to
material losses.




                                                                                                                                37
Deutsche Bank                                    Outlook
Annual Report 2021                               Our Business Segments




Adjusted costs, Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges, Post-tax Return on Average Tangible Equity as well as
Leverage ratio (fully loaded) are non-GAAP financial measures. Please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-
GAAP Financial Measures” of this report for the definitions of such measures and reconciliations to the IFRS measures on
which they are based.



Our Business Segments
Corporate Bank
Corporate Bank revenues are expected to be higher in 2022 compared to the prior year, supported by our growth initiatives,
further roll out of deposit repricing and interest rate tailwinds. We expect Corporate Treasury Services revenues to be higher
supported by extension of lending, growth in flow and structured trade finance products, deposit repricing and more favorable
interest rate outlook. For Institutional Client Services, revenues are also expected to be higher supported by business growth
and the more favorable interest rate outlook. Business Banking revenues are expected to be higher compared to the prior
year, primarily reflecting deposit repricing and other repricing actions.

We expect provision for credit losses for the Corporate Bank in 2022 to be significantly higher, reflecting more normalized
levels of provisioning, compared to a net release in 2021, due to lagging effects of COVID-19 pandemic and roll-off of specific
support programs.

Noninterest expenses for 2022 are expected to be lower. Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges are expected to be
slightly lower across both internal service cost allocations and direct expenses. We expect to benefit from our strict cost
discipline in general and administrative expenses as well as lower compensation and benefits supported by our headcount
actions in prior periods. Regulatory compliance, know-your-client (KYC) and client on-boarding process enhancements,
system stability and control and conduct continue to remain an area of strong focus.

We expect RWA in the Corporate Bank to remain essentially flat in 2022 as increases from our lending activities are expected
to be offset by favorable model changes.

Risks to our outlook include potential impacts on our business model from macroeconomic and global geopolitical uncertainty,
including uncertainties around the duration of and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and associated with the Russian
military action against the Ukraine. In addition, uncertainty around central bank policies (e.g., the interest rate environme nt),
ongoing regulatory developments (e.g., the finalization of the Basel III framework), geopolitical event risks and levels of client
activity may also have an adverse impact.


Investment Bank
We expect Investment Bank revenues to be essentially flat in 2022 compared to the prior year. 2021 was a very strong year
for the Investment Bank driven by a record fee pool in Origination and Advisory and continued client re-engagement aided by
ratings upgrades from the three major rating agencies. While we expect this benefit to continue to into 2022 in addition to a
strengthening US dollar, this should be offset by a materially lower industry fee pool in Origination and Advisory.

We expect Sales and Trading (FIC) revenues to be essentially flat to 2021. Within Rates we plan to target and build out certain
areas in the business and expect to benefit further from our new institutional coverage model launched in 2021, while in
Foreign Exchange we expect the improved market conditions seen in the fourth quarter of 2021 to continue into 2022. Our
Global Emerging Markets business will look to develop its onshore footprint and client workflow solutions further. In Credit
Trading, we intend to invest in targeted areas of the business where growth opportunities are present, but do not expect the
distressed business to repeat the very strong performance seen in 2021. Our Financing business will continue to take a
disciplined and selective approach to the deployment of resources. We expect revenues to be slightly lower due to a reduction
in ABS activity, which was very strong in 2021.

In Origination & Advisory, we expect revenues to be lower in 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to an expected decline in
the market fee pool compared to last year. We expect our Debt Origination business to further increase its left lead and
administrative agency roles in transactions and further develop our ESG capabilities for clients. In Equity Origination we will
continue to provide a competitive offering across products. In Advisory, we plan to build on the momentum of the prior year
and invest in targeted coverage areas where we see growth potential, which should also benefit the wider Origination &
Advisory business.




                                                                                                                               38
Deutsche Bank                                     Outlook
Annual Report 2021                                Our Business Segments




We expect provision for credit losses for the Investment Bank in 2022 to be significantly higher than in the prior year, reflecting
more normalized levels of provisioning. 2021 benefitted from significant releases following COVID-19-related provisions taken
in 2020. We do not expect these to re-occur this year.

Noninterest expenses in the Investment Bank in 2022 are expected to be essentially flat compared to the previous year. Cost
reductions from continued front-to-back alignment, process optimization and decommissioning of applications are expected
to be offset by foreign exchange headwinds, higher bank levy costs and investments into our people. Adjusted costs excluding
transformation charges are also expected to be essentially flat.

For 2022, we expect RWA in the Investment Bank to be higher, driven by Credit Risk RWA resulting from regulatory inflation.
The underlying business growth is expected to be broadly flat for the year.

There are several risks to our outlook in 2022. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to create further disruption
to the economic recovery. The relative success of the vaccination roll outs to the developing world and any potential new
variants could have positive or adverse impacts. The impact of the current Russian military action against the Ukraine on
financial markets is highly uncertain. Central bank policies, specifically around tapering of asset purchases and interest rates
create risks, as does the potential for a period of higher inflation along with ongoing regulatory developments. More broadly,
geopolitical event risks may also have an adverse impact.


Private Bank
In the Private Bank (PB), we will continue to finalize our transformation initiatives and intend to support continuous growth of
our loan and investment businesses. We expect a more favorable outlook for our businesses based on recent interest rate
movements; although we see interest rate pressures abating, they will continue to have a modest negative impact on our
revenue development. After having reached consent agreements for the majority of accounts affected by the April 2021 ruling
of the German Federal Court of Justice (BGH) on pricing agreements, we expect the corresponding negative revenue impacts
to be considerably lower in 2022 compared to 2021.

We assume net revenues in 2022 to be higher compared to 2021. Revenue growth is expected to be supported by a gain
from the closing of the sale of the financial advisors’ network in Italy. Excluding this impact, we anticipate revenues to be
slightly higher compared to 2021 driven by continued business growth in investment and loan products, which we expect in
part to be offset by impacts from the ongoing low interest rate environment. We also expect lower negative impacts from the
aforementioned BGH ruling.

We expect revenues for Private Bank Germany to be slightly higher compared to 2021 supported by lower negative revenue
impacts from the BGH ruling. Excluding this impact, we expect revenues in the Private Bank Germany to remain essentially
flat year over year as significant growth in investment and loan revenues will be partly offset by headwinds from deposit margin
compression, which are expected to further decline in future periods on the back of the more positive recent interest rate
outlook.

In the International Private Bank (IPB), we expect revenues to be higher year over year supported by the aforementioned
anticipated gain from the sale of the Italian financial advisors’ network. Excluding this impact, we expect revenues to also be
higher compared to 2021 as continued growth in investment and loan products will only be partially offset by reduced benefits
from ECB’s TLTRO program.

In the Private Bank, we expect Assets under Management (AuM) volumes to remain essentially flat compared to 2021.
Continued net inflows will in part be offset by the disposal impact after the closing of the financial advisor transaction in Italy.

Provision for credit losses in the Private Bank is expected to be higher in 2022 reflecting low levels in 2021 as well as our
expectation for macroeconomic developments and the impact of continued selected loan growth.

RWA are expected to be slightly higher in 2022 as the growth in our loan book will be in part compensated by positive impacts
from the completion of risk model updates.

Noninterest expenses in the Private Bank are expected to be lower in 2022 reflecting lower costs and increased savings
associated with our transformation initiatives. The latter impact will also lead to slightly lower adjusted costs (excluding
transformation charges) compared to 2021. In addition, we expect positive impacts from lower litigation provisions and
continued cost discipline as well as negative impacts from inflation and regulation.




                                                                                                                                 39
Deutsche Bank                                     Outlook
Annual Report 2021                                Our Business Segments




Risks to our outlook include potential impacts on our business model from macroeconomic uncertainties, including
uncertainties around the duration of and recovery from COVID-19 pandemic and associated with the Russian military action
against the Ukraine, uncertainty on interest rates in the Eurozone, slower economic growth in our major operating countries
and lower client activity. Client activity could be impacted by market uncertainties including higher than expected volatility in
equity and credit markets. The implementation of regulatory requirements including consumer protection measures and delays
in the implementation of our strategic projects could also have a negative impact on our revenues, capital consumption and
costs.


Asset Management
The Asset Management segment principally consists of the consolidated financial results of DWS Group GmbH & Co. KGaA,
of which Deutsche Bank AG owns a controlling interest of approximately 80 %.

DWS is fully committed to delivering on its aspirations for phase two of its corporate journey. DWS expects growth and
efficiency to drive shareholder value creation over time. DWS have refined its medium-term targets at the beginning of 2021.

DWS intends to focus on innovative products and services where it can differentiate and best serve clients, while also
maintaining a disciplined cost approach.

In 2022, we expect net inflow rate to be in line with our medium-term target of greater than 4 % on average to 2024, driven by
targeted growth areas of passive and alternative investments, further enhanced by strategic alliances and product innovations,
including further ESG offerings. In Asset Management, revenues are expected to be broadly flat assuming market stabilization.
Moreover, we expect further investment into growth and platform transformation, which will be partly compensated by ongoing
cost discipline. Costs in 2022 are expected to be slightly higher compared to 2021.

The recent military action Russia commenced against Ukraine has increased the political and economic uncertainty, which
may have an impact on our forward-looking assumptions and impact on our growth assumptions.


Capital Release Unit
The CRU has materially delivered on the strategic transformation path established in 2019, with the transition of the Prime
Finance and Electronic Equities platform complete and significant de-risking already achieved.

In 2022, we expect to focus on three key areas. Firstly, further reducing our costs including internal service allocations. In line
with our previous communication, we target adjusted costs excluding transformation charges of € 0.8 billion for the full year .
Secondly, continuing to manage the risk of the portfolio while de-risking opportunistically. In aggregate, we expect to report
negative revenues for the year 2022 driven by funding costs, hedging costs, mark-to-market impacts and from portfolio exits,
which will be partially offset by income from loan portfolios. Thirdly, simplifying the division’s infrastructure through
decommissioning of applications, closing trading books, exiting locations and legal entities.

Risks to our outlook include the legal and regulatory environment, which we continue to carefully monitor, particularly regarding
the foreign currency denominated mortgage portfolio in Poland. Adverse judicial or regulatory developments could have a
negative impact on the portfolio.


Corporate & Other
In 2022, we expect Corporate & Other (C&O) to generate a pre-tax loss; however this loss is expected to be lower compared
to the previous year. Results will continue to be impacted by valuation and timing differences on positions that are economically
hedged but do not meet the accounting requirements for hedge accounting. There will be certain transitional costs held
centrally relating to changes in our internal funds transfer pricing (‘FTP’) framework, as well as costs linked to legacy activities
relating to the merger of the DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG into Deutsche Bank AG. We expect to retain around € 300
million in total related to these funding costs in C&O in 2022. Expenses associated with shareholder activities as defined in
the OECD Transfer Pricing guidelines not allocated to the business divisions are expected to be around € 400 million, lower
compared to the previous year. C&O is also expected to be impacted by higher group-wide incremental investments, mainly
in our IT and Anti-Financial Crime areas.




                                                                                                                                 40
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Risks




Risks and Opportunities
The following section focuses on future trends or events that may result in downside risk or upside potential from what we
have anticipated in our “Outlook”.

Our aspirations are subject to various external and internal factors, some of which we cannot influence. Timely and complete
achievement of our strategic aspirations may be adversely impacted by reduced revenue-generating capacities of some of
our core businesses should downside macro-economic and market risks crystallize. These risks include the ongoing impacts
of the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with inflationary pressures and supply chain challenges across a range of industries and
markets, the ongoing headwinds posed by regulatory reforms and/or the effects on us of legal and regulatory proceedings.
Certain geopolitical risks are also elevated, particularly with regard to Russia’s military action against Ukraine. Materialization
of risks, whether individually or simultaneously, might (inter alia) lead to reduced profitability negatively affecting capital
accretion and dividend capacity. In contrast, improved macroeconomic and market conditions, our focused business strategy
and the ongoing benefits of digitalization may generate opportunities for the Bank.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has and can continue to affect many different areas of the bank, both with respect to risks
and opportunities, driving significant levels of fluctuation in the results of our operations, strategic plans and targets, as well
as our share price.



Risks
Macroeconomic and market conditions
If economic growth prospects, the interest rate environment and competition in the financial services industry worsen
compared to our expectations, this could adversely affect our business, results of operations or strategic plans.

Deutsche Bank’s macroeconomic, business, and operating environment has improved over the course of 2021 as the global
economy experienced a strong recovery from the pandemic recession. However, the near-term outlook has deteriorated, and
downside risks increased as inflationary pressure intensified further, supply-side disruptions became more entrenched, and
the new, highly infectious Omicron variant of COVID-19 spread rapidly across the globe. Russia’s large-scale military action
against Ukraine and the West’s severe sanctions response against Russia may have significant negative economic
consequences not only for the Russian economy but for Europe too. The crisis has the potential to worsen the already stressed
energy price situation in Europe which could lead to an economic slowdown driving increased losses, including higher credit
provisions, in our portfolio.

The COVID-19 pandemic continues to present tangible downside risk to our business. The global surge in COVID-19 cases
related to the highly transmissible Omicron variant has negatively impacted economic activity due to increased restrictions
imposed by governments across many countries, despite indications that it causes less severe disease than previous variants.
Impacts are expected to subside as vaccination rates continue to increase globally and new antiviral drugs become available
which should limit the number of severe illnesses and deaths, although vaccination rates in many emerging markets continue
to lag behind and developed markets continue to face vaccine hesitancy in significant parts of their population. As a result,
the timing and strength of economic recoveries will continue to vary from country to country. The emergence of new variants
of concern may require further social distancing requirements or lockdowns and the effects of these are not fully predictable
as they will vary depending on the nature of the variant, country-specific pandemic conditions and policy preferences.
Countries which have pursued a zero COVID-19 policy, including China, might struggle to contain Omicron as successfully as
other variants due to its more infectious nature. Although some incipient changes in policy have started to occur, strict
lockdowns may be required which could impact China’s economy and global supply chains.

Supply chain pressures in global production, trade and logistics resulting from the pandemic and subsequent strong pick-up
in demand will likely persist through 2022, constraining output and fueling price inflation of manufactured and intermediate
goods as well as energy and other commodities. Consumer price inflation rates have hit multi-decade highs in Europe and the
US and soaring energy prices are driving cost pressures for corporates and households which may impact the quality of our
portfolios in particular in directly impacted industries such as Utilities. As a result, we may observe higher than expected
defaults in selected industries or regions, higher drawdowns of credit facilities and generally higher market volatility.




                                                                                                                                41
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Risks




The inflation outlook remains uncertain. Consensus and market-implied projections point to continuously elevated inflationary
pressure as supply bottlenecks and other temporary factors fade only slowly. Although major central banks are expected to
gradually remove extraordinary monetary policy stimulus by phasing out emergency bond purchases and lifting key policy
rates, there remains a risk that consumer and asset price inflation in major advanced economies will continue to accelerate
faster than anticipated, requiring more aggressive monetary policy tightening. While this could create some upside potential
for our business activity levels and net interest income, a disorderly sharp increase in bond yields could trigger a downward
correction to equities and the widening of credit spreads, which could adversely impact trading results. In addition, we could
see increased counterparty credit exposure on derivatives, increased credit risks on highly leveraged clients and emerging
markets with external imbalances as well as risks to our pension fund assets. More broadly, this could impact the valuation of
our assets and liabilities and drive changes in the composition of our balance sheet.

Despite elevated inflationary pressures, interest rates remain extremely low currently with the ECB deposit facility rate still set
at -0.50 %, German nominal Bund yields, until recently, trading at / close to negative territory and real rates deeply negative.
The low interest rate environment has supported elevated market valuations across risk assets, particularly in US equities
including the technology sector, raising the risk of a significant price correction if policy rates rise more rapidly and to a higher
level than currently anticipated. Delayed tightening would likely further exacerbate stretched market valuations and drive
renewed pressure on bank interest margins. More importantly, a further prolonged period of low interest rates in the Eurozone
could materially affect our profitability and balance sheet deployment. While our revenues are particularly sensitive to interest
rates, given the size of our loan and deposit books denominated in Euros, the low interest rate environment can also impact
other balance sheet positions, which are accounted at fair value.

China related risks are elevated with ongoing concerns over the potential for a broad and persistent deterioration of China’s
highly leveraged property sector and property developers. We have seen numerous rating actions by external agencies, noting
that some of the names which have seen significant rating deterioration were up until recently investment-grade rated, and
widespread liquidity shortages for the sector. Stabilizing the economy has become a key priority for the Chinese government
in 2022, but risks of ongoing liquidity constraints and selected defaults, in the property sector remain elevated. In a severe
downside this may lead to broader contagion across weaker state and privately owned enterprises which could drive increased
losses, including higher credit provisions, in our portfolio.

A substantial proportion of the assets and liabilities on our balance sheet comprise of financial instruments that we carry at
fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in our income statement. As a result of such changes, we have incurred losses
in the past, and may incur further losses in the future. We are exposed to risks related to movements from foreign exchange
rates, most notably related to the USD and GBP.

Similarly, liquidity risk could arise from lower value and marketability of high quality liquid assets (HQLA), as these would affect
the amount of proceeds available for covering cash outflows during a stress event. Additional haircuts may be incurred on top
of any already impaired asset values. Moreover, securities might lose their eligibility as collateral necessary for accessing
central bank facilities, as well as their value in the repo/wholesale funding market. As such, a debt crisis would directly affect
the bank’s liquidity position.

The aforementioned external developments can impact our revenue generating capabilities, while market declines and
volatility could also negatively impact the value of financial instruments and cause us to incur losses.

We are exposed to pension risks which can materially impact the measurement of our pension obligations, including interest
rate, inflation and longevity risks that can materially impact our earnings.

If multiple key downside risks simultaneously materialize and/or occur in combination with a more pronounced economic
slowdown, the negative impact on our business environment could be more severe than currently expected.


Political risks
A number of political and geopolitical risks and events could negatively affect our business environment, including weaker
economic activity, financial market corrections, compliance risks or a lower interest rate level.

On February 24, 2022, Russia commenced large-scale military action against Ukraine. In response to this action, the West
has moved to impose broad-based sanctions (including asset-freeze / blocking sanctions) targeting Russia, including but not
limited to major Russian banks, the Russian Central Bank, certain other companies, Russian parliament members and certain
members of the Russian elite and their families but also banning primary / secondary trading of sovereign debt and other
select securities as well as announced to disconnect select Russian banks from SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank
Financial Telecommunication). It is possible that additional sanctions may be imposed, including additional or new asset-
freeze / blocking sanctions of individuals (SDNs) or companies (including further systemically important corporates and banks),
prohibition of conversion of RUB e.g. into USD, EUR or GBP, and disconnection of Russia from SWIFT. Sanctions are subject
to rapid change and it is also possible that new direct or indirect secondary sanctions could be imposed by the United States


                                                                                                                                  42
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Risks




or other jurisdictions without warning as a result of developments. Considering the sanctions announced in the wake of
February 24th, we are looking at an unprecedented amount of sanctions measures, not all of which are fully aligned across
jurisdictions and therefore further increase operational complexity and risk of making errors in managing day-to-day business
activities within the rapidly evolving sanctions environment. Generally, enhanced Russia sanctions result in further increased
complexity of our control environment and, the more clients are impacted, the more challenging it could be to completely wind-
down cases within the timeframe provided by licenses or authorizations. New sanctions as well as countermeasures by the
Russian government could also result in differences between the local application / implementation of relevant requirements
by Deutsche Bank Moscow and the Deutsche Bank Group (as Deutsche Bank Moscow would have to adhere to local law).
Subsequently, this would create conflict of law situations and certain exemptions would have to be applied. Furthermore,
Deutsche Bank is utilizing inhouse technology resources in Russia, which contribute to the development of a number of the
Bank’s critical applications. We are subject to the risk that our ability to utilize these technology resources could be impaired
or lost, for instance due to sanctions from the West, Russian state-initiated actions or management actions. The heightened
risk of sanctions, including Russian countermeasures, has been considered in our portfolio strategy. We are monitoring the
developments closely and utilizing dedicated governance structures including Global and Regional Crisis Management as and
when required. We have also seen increased cyber-attacks, which may pose direct and indirect risks to us. The downside
impact of the ongoing situation concerning Ukraine, from both a financial and non-financial risk perspective will depend on
how the current crisis will unfold further and may impact our ability to meet our stated targets. The regulatory environment or
other restrictions including sanctions imposed may result in our business activities related to Russia becoming unviable or t hat
we lose control over our assets. Despite the business continuity and crisis management policies currently in place, the conflict
also poses challenges related to personnel as well as loss of business continuity, which may disrupt our business and lead to
material losses.

Tensions between the U.S. and China remain elevated across a wide range of areas, including trade and technology-related
issues, Hong Kong, Taiwan, human rights, and cybersecurity. The U.S. has imposed selected sanctions as well as export and
investment restrictions on Chinese companies and officials, and China has imposed sanctions on certain U.S. companies and
officials and introduced a framework for blocking regulations aimed at the extraterritorial application of sanctions against China.
Likewise, the EU has imposed sanctions on China in relation to human rights issues, which were reciprocated by China. While
we cannot predict the impacts of sanctions on our business or our financial targets, such measures raise potential regulatory
compliance and conflicts of laws challenges and the impacts could be material and adverse.

Other geopolitical risks, which could negatively impact our business environment and our financial targets include the potential
for escalation in the Middle East over Iran’s nuclear program, should the U.S. and Iran fail to reach agreement over a return
to or implementation of a new JCPOA (Iran nuclear deal).

Brexit uncertainty and associated economic downside risks have declined over the twelve months since the UK left the EU’s
single market and customs union at the end of the transition period on December 31, 2020. Deutsche Bank has been able to
continue to service EEA (European Economic Area) based clients thanks to its program to move booking of all EEA clients to
Deutsche Bank AG Frankfurt which was completed before the end of 2020. Sales and coverage staff were in place in the
EU27 to ensure all regulated activity relating to EEA clients is performed within the new licensing laws post Brexit. However,
some uncertainty remains as negotiations between the UK and the EU have continued through 2021, especially with regard
to financial services not extensively covered by the existing deal. Recent announcements from the EU commission confirming
an extension to the current temporary equivalence arrangements for UK CCPS (Central Clearing Counterparty) has removed
the risk that access to UK clearing would be withheld from EU firms from June 2022 (when the previous extension expired).
Without equivalence between EU and UK regimes for Financial Services we will be restricted in our ability to provide financial
services to and from the UK. Discussions on the nature of this extension and the final outcome will continue in 2022, with
further clarification is expected in Q1 2022. We await communication from the UK regulators (the Prudential Regulation
Authority and Financial Conduct Authority) in relation to our application for authorization to continue to undertake regulated
activity in the UK (previously undertaken pursuant to the European Passport provisions). Failure to gain authorization as a
Third Country Branch could adversely affect our business, results of operations or strategic plans. Some economic downside
risks remain in case the UK were to invoke Article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol which, in a worst case outcome, could
lead to the EU suspending the Brexit trade deal. In the absence of a negotiated solution, World Trade Organization (WTO)
rules could eventually apply which could mean higher tariffs which would further negatively impact trade and economic activit y.




                                                                                                                                43
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Risks




Strategy

We have communicated various targets in the section “Strategy”. One of them relates to the CET 1 ratio where preserving a
CET 1 ratio above 12.5 % is a key element of our strategy and our commitments to regulators. Our capital ratio development
reflects, among other things: the operating performance of our core businesses; the extent of our restructuring and
transformation costs; costs relating to potential litigation and regulatory enforcement actions; the progress we make in
deleveraging the Capital Release Unit; growth in the balance sheet usage of the core businesses; changes in our tax and
pension accounts; impacts on Other Comprehensive Income; and changes in regulation and regulatory technical standards.

We may also have difficulties selling businesses or assets at favorable prices or at all and may experience material losses
from these assets and other investments irrespective of market developments, or may fail to close on transactions under
contract.

Moreover, if we miss our publicly communicated targets, as communicated in the section “Strategy”, incur losses, including
further impairments and provisions, experience lower than planned profitability or an erosion of our capital base and broader
financial condition, our results of operations and share price may be materially adversely affected. This also includes the risk
that we will not be able to make desired distributions of profits to our shareholders which are subject to Deutsche Bank AG’s
capacity under standalone financial statements in accordance with German accounting rules (HGB). Where such targets
reflect commitments to regulators, missing them may also trigger action from such regulators or rating agencies.

The Group enters into contracts and letters of intent in connection with its ongoing transformation as well as in the ordinary
course of business. When these are preliminary in nature or conditional, the Group is exposed to the risk that they do not
result in execution of the final agreement or consummation of the proposed arrangement, putting associated benefits with
such agreements at risk.

The operating environment could worsen significantly or our assumptions and controls over any of the aforementioned items
could vary significantly from our current expectations. The COVID-19 pandemic and its continuing impact on the global
economy as well as other macroeconomic developments, including uncertainty around the inflation outlook and policy rates,
as well as geopolitical risk factors, including potential impacts from the rapidly evolving situation around the Russ ia conflict
may affect our ability to meet our financial and non-financial targets as well as impact business and flow volumes including
planned levels of Assets under Management in DWS and lending volumes across our Corporate, Investment and Private
Bank. We continually plan and adapt to changing situations but continue to run the risk that we may be materially adversely
affected by a protracted downturn in local, regional or global economic conditions that are harming specific sectors of various
economies and in turn could impact our core businesses. In these situations, we would need to take action to ensure we meet
our minimum capital objectives. These actions or measures may result in adverse effects on our business, results of operations
or strategic plans and targets.

The COVID-19 pandemic temporarily reduced the rate of regular employee attrition versus historical levels, creating a more
challenging context to our cost targets and increasing the cost of involuntary severance arrangements. This also limited the
opportunity to redeploy talented employees within the bank whose roles were made redundant. Requests from regulators to
demonstrate moderation in the levels of compensation that we can offer, may put the Group at a disadvantage in attracting
and retaining talented employees. However, in 2021, staff attrition levels have reverted to pre-COVID levels and we are
particularly focused on developments in the Asia-Pacific region. While the current trends are moving in line with historical
patterns, i.e., high attrition in the third quarter, the higher attrition dropped in fourth quarter 2021, aligned to the pre-pandemic
trends. We continue to closely monitor attrition. Globally, we observe extremely competitive markets particularly, in the US
and India.

All of the above could have a material impact on our CET 1 as well as other target ratios. It is therefore possible that we will
fall below e.g. our CET 1 target of at least 12.5 %, or short of our cost income ratio target of 70 % or Post-tax Return on
Average Tangible Equity target of 8 %, as highlighted in the section “Strategy” in this report.




                                                                                                                                  44
Deutsche Bank                                    Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                               Risks




Liquidity and funding risks
Our credit ratings have been upgraded in 2021 by all three leading rating agencies. The latest update in the fourth quarter
came from S&P which upgraded our Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating and Senior Preferred Debt Rating to A- (from BBB+),
with a stable outlook. Previously in August 2021, Moody’s upgraded our Counterparty Rating and Long-Term Deposit Rating
to A2 (from A3), with positive outlook. In September 2021, Fitch upgraded our Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to BBB+
(from BBB), with positive outlook. Those credit ratings upgrades contributed to a decrease in our funding costs and supported
our customers’ willingness to continue to do business with us.

Among potential risks, our liquidity, business activities and profitability may be adversely affected by inability to access the
debt capital market and funds from our subsidiaries or to sell assets during periods of market-wide or firm-specific liquidity
constraints. This situation may arise due to circumstances unrelated to our businesses and outside our control, such as
disruptions in the financial markets, or circumstances specific to us, such as reluctance of our counterparties or the market to
finance our operations due to perceptions about potential outflows resulting from litigation, regulatory and similar matters,
actual or perceived weaknesses in our businesses, our business model or our strategy, as well as in our resilience to counter
negative economic and market conditions.

Our ability to transact FX trades may be reduced when there are issues in the FX market or where counterparties are
concerned about our ability to fulfil agreed transaction terms and therefore seek to limit their exposure to us. Additionally,
increased FX mismatch may lead to increased collateral outflows where the euro (our local currency) materially depreciates
against other major currencies.

The Net Stable Funding Ratio (“NSFR”) became a regulatory requirement for Deutsche Bank Group, including the parent
entity Deutsche Bank AG from June 2021. NSFR will also apply going forward to other subsidiaries across the group subject
to local regulatory requirements. Upon the introduction of this ratio as a binding minimum requirement, Deutsche Bank Group
and Deutsche Bank AG reported the NSFR levels higher than required 100 %. We expect other subsidiaries for which NSFR
would become a requirement to be above the regulatory minimum.

While our Liquidity Coverage Ratio remained well above the regulatory minimum during 2021, the risk of e.g. future waves of
COVID-19 and related economic impacts may put pressure on liquidity metrics and lead to liquidity and funding outflows. At
the same time, this may temporarily impact our cost of funding and therefore adversely affect our profitability.


Regulatory supervisory reforms, assessments and proceedings
Although regulatory reforms have been selectively delayed in order to support banks’ efforts to more easily manage the
impacts from COVID-19 and provide financing to the real economy, the regulatory reforms enacted and proposed in response
to weaknesses identified during the last financial crisis together with increased regulatory scrutiny and discretion will im pose
material costs on us, create significant uncertainty and may adversely affect our business plans as well as our ability to execute
our strategic plans in the medium-term. Those changes that require us to maintain increased capital may significantly affect
our business model, financial condition, and results of operation as well as the competitive environment more generally.
Several future changes will impact our business. One is the implementation of Final Basel III reforms (through CRR III).
Implementation of these changes are however still heavily debated in all key jurisdictions by policymakers. We currently expect
our capital requirements to increase in 2025 from the implementation of Final Basel III in the EU, in particular from higher risk
weights for our exposure in most risk areas. We expect a further increase in risk-weights for our exposures from 2028/2029
from the introduction of the new output floor included in Final Basel III. Regulatory reforms in respect of resolvability or
resolution measures may also impact our business operations. In addition, regulatory changes may impact how key entities
are funded which could affect how businesses operate and negatively impact results. Regulatory actions may also require us
to change our business model or result in some business activities becoming unviable.

Regulators can also impose capital surcharges or regulatory adjustments, for example, as a result of the regular Supervisory
Review and Evaluation Process (SREP). Such adjustments may, for example, reflect additional risks posed by deficiencies in
our control environment, or come as a result of supervisory inspections concerning the treatment of specific products or
transactions. One of these areas in focus of the European Central Bank (ECB) with regards to risk taking is leveraged lending,
for which the ECB has announced its intent to clarify their expectations for all banks under the Single Supervisory Mechanism
and to consider quantitative measures in future SREP decisions for institutions which the ECB assesses as non-compliant
with these expectations. Such potential quantitative measures may result in a significant negative impact. More broadly, this
also includes conclusions the ECB draws from regulatory stress tests conducted by the EBA or the ECB. The ECB evaluates
each bank’s performance from a qualitative angle to inform the decision on the level of Pillar 2 Requirement and a quantitative
outcome which is one aspect when assessing the level of Pillar 2 guidance. The ECB has already used these powers in its
SREP decisions in the past and it may continue to do so to address findings from onsite inspections. In extreme cases, they
can even suspend certain activities or our permission to operate within their jurisdictions and impose monetary fines for failures
to comply with rules applicable to us.



                                                                                                                               45
Deutsche Bank                                      Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                 Risks




Regulators can also impose capital surcharges to address macroeconomic risks, through the use of macroprudential tools.
These include CET1 buffer increases that could apply group-wide or only for local activities at Member State level or for
specific types of exposures (e.g. mortgages). The use of these tools is governed by the EU prudential framework and are
typically decided by national macroprudential authorities, such as BaFin, often on the basis of Central Bank analysis for
macroeconomic risks.

Action has been taken by regulators in Europe and in other regions to provide targeted and temporary flexibility from elements
of the prudential framework to avoid unintended pro-cyclical effects. For instance, at the European level, changes made to the
Leverage Ratio include, allowing the netting of pending settlements payables and receivables and the temporary exclusion of
cash held in Eurozone central banks. On June 18, 2021 the European Central Bank (“ECB”, our principal regulator) announced
the leverage ratio relief would expire in March 2022.

Furthermore, implementing enhanced controls may result in higher regulatory compliance costs that could offset or exceed
efficiency gains. Regulators may disagree with our interpretation of specific regulatory requirements when interpretative
matters are discussed as part of our ongoing regulatory dialogue or in the context of supervisory exams. An example of
unanticipated increase of control could be the risk that local regulators require a major Deutsche Bank legal entity to ring-
fence liquidity held locally and, in turn, limit the redeployment of liquidity to other affiliates. Changes in rule interpretations can
have a material impact on the treatment of positions for Pillar 1 regulatory purposes. Similarly, the evolving interpretations of
the European Banking Authority (EBA) on the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) can also negatively impact our
regulatory capital, leverage or liquidity ratios.

Regulators and central banks have actively encouraged the transition from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)
currencies through 2021 to alternative risk-free rates (RFRs). The administrator of LIBOR has ceased publication of CHF
LIBOR, EUR LIBOR and certain GBP, JPY and USD settings after December 31, 2021. The remaining USD LIBOR settings
will cease after June 30, 2023. EONIA has ceased on January 3, 2022, while EURIBOR will continue to be available. In the
EU, UK, and U.S., legislation has been enacted to improve the legal certainty and contract continuity relating to transition to
risk-free rates. Nonetheless, risks of contractual uncertainty and dispute may remain.

A material portion of our assets and liabilities, including financial instruments we trade and other transactions and services we
are involved in, have interest rates linked to financial benchmarks. The discontinuation of these benchmarks and the transition
to RFRs pose a variety of risks to us, including risks of market disruption with associated market and liquidity risks, litigation
risk, accounting and tax risks and operational risks. Some of the litigation and market risks have been mitigated through tough
legacy legislation proposed by EU and UK authorities but other risks remain. Amendments to the Benchmarks Regulation
included the creation of new powers for the European Commission to designate statutory replacement rates, as well as an
extension of the transition period for the third country (i.e. outside of EEA) benchmarks regime until end-2023. The European
Commission has since exercised its new powers in October 2021, designating statutory replacement rates for CHF LIBOR
and EONIA. The statutory replacements have come into force since January 3, 2022. In the UK, the Critical Benchmarks
(References and Administrators’ Liability) Act provides that references to LIBOR in relevant English law contracts will be
interpreted as including references to synthetic LIBOR.

More broadly, initiatives to reform existing benchmarks, our participation in benchmark submissions, usage of benchmarks
under EU and UK BMR (Benchmarks Regulation) and administration of certain benchmarks including via Deutsche Bank’s
benchmark administrator, Deutsche Bank Index Quant (DBIQ), could potentially expose us to regulatory action legal,
reputational, accounting and tax risks and other risks. In particular, legal and compliance risk (including conduct risk) may
arise due to the operational risks of participating in a benchmark submission, either as part of a panel with the requirement to
comply with a code of conduct under EU and UK BMR (and using models and expert judgement) or as provider of transactions
data to a benchmark administrator. Fines for violations of EU BMR can reach an amount of up to 10 % of annual turnover.

The potential financial stability risk for the EU due to central clearing arrangements outside of the EU will continue to feature
in 2022. On February 8, 2022, the European Commission published an extension to the temporary equivalence decision for
UK Central Counterparties to June 30, 2025. During the next three years, until the expiry of the temporary equivalence
decision, the European Commission will continue to focus on measures to channel clearing services in EUR-denominated
products to EU Central Counterparties by making them more competitive and cost efficient and by strengthening EU-level
supervision. Furthermore, the existing transition period for third country CCPs which allows them to be classified as qualifying
CCPs for capital allocation purposes without a formal equivalence decision by the European Commission and recognition by
the European Securities and Markets Authority, the European securities regulator, will expire on June 28, 2022 and is not
expected to be extended. Depending on the status of these decisions and potential mitigating actions, these changes can
have a negative impact on our regulatory capital and increase our operating costs.

While we continue to develop and implement our approach to climate risk assessment and management and promote the
integration of climate-related factors across our entire platform, both rapidly changing regulatory as well as stakeholder
demands may materially affect our business, results of operations or strategic plans if we fail to adopt or implement our
measures to transition to a low-carbon economy.



                                                                                                                                   46
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Risks




Legal and regulatory enforcement proceedings and tax examinations
We are subject to a number of legal and regulatory enforcement proceedings and tax examinations. The outcome of these
proceedings is difficult to estimate and may substantially and adversely affect our planned results of operations, financial
condition and reputation. If these matters are resolved on terms that are more adverse to us than we expect, in terms of their
costs or necessary changes to our businesses, or if related negative perceptions concerning our business and prospects and
related business impacts increase, we may not be able to achieve our strategic objectives or we may be required to change
them.


Compliance and Anti-Financial Crime risks
Combatting financial crime and complying with applicable laws and regulations is vital to ensuring the stability of banks, such
as Deutsche Bank, and the integrity of the international financial system.

A robust and effective internal control environment and adequate infrastructure (comprising people, policies and procedures,
controls testing, and IT systems) are necessary to ensure that we conduct our business in compliance with the laws,
regulations, and associated supervisory expectations.

Our Compliance controls and surveillance processes, as well as other internal control processes that are aimed at ensuring
the proper conduct of our businesses and services as well at preventing market abuse, insider dealing, and conduct breaches,
are from time to time subject to regulatory reviews and/or inquiries in certain jurisdictions.

Furthermore, our anti-money laundering (AML) and know-your client (KYC) processes and controls aimed at preventing
misuse of our products and services to commit financial crime, continue to be subject of regulatory reviews, investigations,
and enforcement actions in several jurisdictions. We continually seek to enhance the efficacy of our internal control
environment and improve our infrastructure to revised regulatory requirements and to close gaps identified by us and/or by
regulators and monitors.

The BaFin ordered us in September 2018 to take appropriate internal safeguards and comply with general due diligence
obligations to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing, in February 2019 to review our group-wide risk management
processes in correspondence banking and adjust them where necessary, and in April 2021 to adopt further appropriate internal
safeguards and comply with due diligence obligations, with regards to regular client file reviews. This expansion also applies
to correspondent relationships and transaction monitoring. The BaFin has appointed a special representative to monitor the
implementation of the ordered measures as well as to assess and report on the progress of the implementation to the BaFin.

More generally, we operate in a highly and increasingly regulated and litigious environment, potentially exposing us to liability
and other costs, the amounts of which may be substantial and difficult to estimate, as well as to legal and regulatory sanctions
and reputational harm. We continue to maintain a regular dialogue with our supervisory authorities who expect the bank to
deliver control improvements at a faster pace and in a higher quality manner. We understand this criticism and are committed
to meeting these expectations.

Should any of the legal proceedings be resolved against us, or any investigations result in a finding that the Bank failed to
comply with applicable law, the Bank could be exposed to material damages, fines, limitations on business, remedial
undertakings, criminal prosecution, or other material adverse effects on our financial condition, as well as risk to our reputation
and potential loss of business because of extensive media attention. Guilty pleas by or convictions of us or our affiliates in
criminal proceedings, or regulatory or enforcement orders, settlements, or agreements to which we or our affiliates become
subject, may have consequences that have adverse effects on certain of our businesses.


Risk management policies, procedures and methods as well as operational risks
We have devoted significant resources to develop our risk management policies, procedures and methods, including with
respect to market, credit, liquidity, operational as well as reputational and model risk. However, they may not be fully effective
in mitigating our risk exposures in all economic or market environments or against all types of risk, including risks that we fail
to identify or anticipate. Where we use these models to calculate risk-weighted assets for regulatory purposes, potential
deficiencies may also lead regulators to impose a recalibration of input parameters or a complete review of the model.

We may face operational risks arising from failures in our internal control environment or errors in the performance of our
processes, e.g. in transaction processing, as well as loss of business continuity, which may disrupt our business and lead to
material losses. At the same time, we may also face risks of material losses or reputational damage if services third parties
facilitate are not provided as agreed or in line with our internal standards.




                                                                                                                                47
Deutsche Bank                                      Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                 Risks




As a global bank, Deutsche Bank is often in the news. Deutsche Bank conducts its media dialogue through official teams.
However, members of the media sometimes approach Deutsche Bank staff outside of these channels and Deutsche Bank
internal information, including confidential matters have been subject to external news media coverage. Leaks to the media
can have severe consequences for Deutsche Bank, particularly when they involve inaccurate statements, rumors, speculation
or unsanctioned opinions. This can result in financial consequences such as the loss of confidence or business with clients
and may impact the bank’s share price or our capital instruments by undermining investor confidence. While we have
processes in place to manage these risks, our ability to protect ourselves against these risks is limited.

In addition, we are also exposed to conduct risk, comprising risks relating to inappropriate business practices, including selling
products that are not suitable for a particular customer, fraud, unauthorized trading and failure to comply with applicable
regulations, laws and internal policies. For example, an employee’s misconduct reflecting fraudulent intent may lead to not
only material losses but also reputational damage.

From an operational perspective, and despite the business continuity and crisis management policies currently in place, the
COVID-19 pandemic, the emergence of new variants of the virus and resulting rapid changes in government responses may
continue to have an adverse impact on our business activities and control environment. The continuing move across global
industries to conduct business from home and away from primary office locations, is driving a more accelerated evolution of
business practices compared to historic trends. The demand on our technology infrastructure and the risk of cyber-attacks
could lead to technology failures, security breaches, unauthorized access, loss or destruction of data or unavailability of
services, as well as increase the likelihood of conduct breaches.

Any of these events could potentially result in litigation, a financial loss, disruption of our business activities and liability to our
customers, regulatory scrutiny, government intervention or damage to our reputation. At the same time the cost to us of
managing these cyber, information security and other risks remains high. Delays in the implementation of regulatory
requirements, including consumer protection measures and of our strategic projects could also have a negative impact on our
revenues and costs, while a return of higher market volatility has led, and could continue to lead to increased demand on
markets surveillance monitoring and processing. Our vendors and service providers are facing similar challenges with the risk
that these counterparties could be unable to fulfil their contractual obligations, putting the benefits we seek to obtain fro m such
contracts at risk.

In order to manage financial and non-financial risk impacts of COVID-19, Deutsche Bank is utilizing dedicated governance
structures including Global and Regional Crisis Management. More broadly and where relevant, additional controls and
processes have been established including additional reporting to ensure relevant senior stakeholders including the
Management Board are up-to date. We expect 2022 to be demanding from a risk management perspective.


Third Party Risk
Third parties are integral to the successful daily operation of any financial services firm, including Deutsche Bank. The use of
and dependence upon third parties in the sector has increased over the years, in support of our business and operations,
necessitating a corresponding increase in capabilities to manage them. There is increasing interest of regulators in 3rd party
concentration risk and critical third parties to ensure financial stability in the market. In addition, regulatory trends from within
Financial Services and broader require organizations to consider the broader impact a third party can make.

The nature of what we use third parties for has also evolved and now includes more fundamental aspects of services, including
the use of Cloud as an infrastructure for our own technology. This represents different risks and requires more robust risk
assessments, appropriate contracting and ongoing oversight commensurate with relevant risks. It has also led to steady
increase in regulation and regulatory scrutiny over not just how we manage third party’s day to day, but also assessing the
levels of resiliency needed that is proportional to the importance of the business services supported by the third party.

Deutsche Bank has a well-established approach to Third Party Risk Management; from a clear policy and procedure through
to centralized risk process for businesses to use when engaging with external vendors. However, services provided by third
parties pose risks to us comparable to those we bear when we perform the services ourselves, and we remain ultimately
responsible for the services our third parties provide. We depend on our third parties to conduct their delivery of services in
compliance with applicable laws, regulations and in accordance with the contractual terms and service levels they have agreed
with us. If our third parties do not conduct business in accordance with these standards, we may be exposed to material losses
and could be subject to regulatory action or litigation as well as be exposed to reputational damage. More generally, if a third
party relationship does not meet our expectations, we could be exposed to financial risks, such as the costs and expenses
associated with migration of the services to another third party and business and operational risks related to the transition,
and we could fail to achieve the benefits we sought from the relationship. In order to mitigate such risks, we continue to
enhance our internal control environment and improve our infrastructure to meet revised regulatory requirements and to close
any gaps identified by us and/or by regulators and or their nominated monitors.




                                                                                                                                    48
Deutsche Bank                                      Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                 Risks




Impairment of Goodwill and other intangible assets
Goodwill is reviewed annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that impairment may have occurred.

Other intangible assets are recognized separately from goodwill when they are separable or arise from contractual or other
legal rights and their fair value can be measured reliably. These assets are tested for impairment or their useful lives reaffirmed
at least annually. This includes the testing in relation to software impairments.

The determination of the recoverable amount in the impairment assessment of non-financial assets requires estimates based
on quoted market prices, prices of comparable businesses, present value or other valuation techniques, or a combination
thereof, necessitating management to make subjective judgments and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions could
result in significant differences to the amounts reported if underlying circumstances were to change. Impairments of goodwill
and other intangible assets have had and may have a material adverse effect on our profitability and results of operations.


Pension Obligations
We sponsor a number of post-employment benefit plans on behalf of our employees, including defined benefit plans. To the
extent that the factors that drive our pension liabilities move in a manner adverse to us, or that our assumptions regarding key
variables prove incorrect, or that our funding of our pension liabilities does not sufficiently hedge those liabilities, we could be
required to make additional contributions or be exposed to actuarial or accounting losses in respect of our pension plans.


Deferred Tax Assets
We recognize deferred tax assets for future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial
statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, unused tax losses and unused tax
credits. To the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable income will be available to allow all or a portion of our
deferred tax assets to be utilized, we must reduce the carrying amounts. This accounting estimate related to the deferred tax
assets depends upon underlying assumptions, such as assumptions about the historical tax capacity and profitability
information as well as forecasted operating results based upon approved business plans, that can change from period to
period and requires significant management judgment. Each quarter, we re-evaluate our estimate related to deferred tax
assets, including our assumptions about future profitability. Reductions in the amount of deferred tax assets from a change in
estimate have had and may in the future have material adverse effects on our profitability, equity and financial condition.


Technology and Innovation
Digital Innovation offers market entry opportunities for new competitors such as cross-industry entrants, global high tech
companies or financial technology companies. We therefore expect our businesses to have an increased need for investment
in digital product and process resources to mitigate the risk of a potential loss of market share.

To be able to respond to market developments and client needs faster and more flexibly, the bank has decided to migrate in-
scope applications to the Public Cloud through a strategic partnership with Google Cloud. This partnership with Google is a
major milestone in the Bank’s digital journey and shows a commitment to embrace new technologies such as Google Cloud.
The objective is to enhance the client experience through improved products and services, system resiliency and security as
well as reducing the cost inefficiencies of running legacy platforms. Such a major technology migration requires robust
governance and planning, including required allocation of funding, to manage the risk of security and stability issues.
Additionally, there is significant regulatory interest in this program. Also, as with any external service providers, the bank must
ensure the highest standards of data privacy and security controls to safeguard client and bank information. Failure to do so
can compromise client trust, lead to financial losses and, in severe cases, regulatory penalties, litigation and the obligation to
compensate individuals for damage.

We operate in an environment with a continually evolving threat landscape related to information security. We may face
operational risks arising from failures in our control environment including errors in the performance of our processes or
security controls, as well as loss of data, which may disrupt our business and lead to material losses. At the same time, we
may also face risks of material losses or reputational damage if services are not provided as agreed or in line with our internal
standards. Cyber-attacks could impact us both directly and indirectly via our clients or services provided by third parties.

Therefore, we continue to invest in security risk mitigation. Of particular importance in 2021 was the continued focus on
addressing the following main threats: financial theft, data disclosure, and service disruption along with system misuse, asset
or destruction, data distortion and information security regulatory adherence & conduct risk. The bank continually reviewed
and – where necessary – modified its layered defence, working systematically to fend off evolving threats. We aim to build
information security controls into every layer of technology, including identity, data, infrastructure, devices and applications.



                                                                                                                                   49
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Risks




This layered approach shall provide end-to-end protection as well as multiple opportunities to detect, prevent, respond to, and
recover from cyber threats.

The lack of a comprehensive data approach in our customer lifecycle management can put customer experience and
regulatory reviews at risk. Any of these events could involve us in litigation or cause us to suffer financial loss, disrupti on of
our business activities, liability to our customers, government intervention or damage to our reputation. In particular, risks
arising from non-compliance with KYC while on-boarding customers and additional risks of AFC and AML downstream of the
customer lifecycle, could be mediated by a coherent data approach which is currently in the process of being developed.
Furthermore, we also face challenges with respect to embracing and incorporating new and disruptive technologies in
conjunction with existing technological architecture in order to ensure industry standards of information security and customer
experience.

Major technology transformations in our business areas are executed via dedicated initiatives. The benefits of these include
IT and business cost reduction, control improvements, revenue growth through provision of new client features or targeted
client growth. One of these initiatives, UNITY, which aims at simplifying our IT environment through the migration of IT systems
from the former Postbank into those of the Deutsche Bank branded business, faces important milestones in the beginning of
2022. The associated program execution risks, including resource shortage, extended implementation timelines or impact of
the change related activity on the control environment or functionality issues in the upgraded applications or underlying
technology are carefully managed to partially mitigate the risk of not fully achieving expected benefits.


Environmental, social and governance risk
The impacts of rising global temperatures, and the enhanced focus on climate change and the transition to a net-zero economy
from society, our regulators and the banking sector have led to the emergence of new and increasing sources of financial and
non-financial risks. These include the physical risks arising from extreme weather events, which are growing in frequency and
severity, as well as transition risks as carbon intensive sectors are faced with higher taxation, reduced demand and potentially
restricted access to financing. These risks can impact Deutsche Bank across a broad range of financial and non-financial risk
types.

Financial institutions are facing increased scrutiny on climate and broader ESG-related issues from governments, regulators,
shareholders and other bodies, leading to reputational risks if we are not seen to support the transition to a lower carbon
economy, to protect biodiversity and human rights. We are also required to review and enhance our ESG risk management
frameworks in alignment with emerging regulatory guidance and to ensure that we accurately portray the impacts of our
activities on ESG aspects. There is a lack of consistent and comprehensive ESG data and methodologies available today
which means that we are heavily reliant on proxy estimates and qualitative approaches when assessing the risks to our
balance sheet, which introduces a high degree of uncertainty into our climate-related disclosures. In 2022, the ECB will conduct
its first climate stress test, an exercise which contains a number of novel and complex elements which require the development
of new methodologies and data sources.

Deutsche Bank is committed to managing our business activities and operations in a sustainable manner, including aligning
our portfolios with net zero emissions by 2050. We are continuing to develop and implement our approach to environmental
risk assessments and management in order to promote the integration of environmental-related factors across our business
activities. This includes the ability to identify, monitor and manage risks and to conduct regular scenario analysis and str ess
testing. Both rapidly changing regulatory as well as stakeholder demands, combined with significant focus by stakeholders,
may materially affect our businesses if we fail to adopt such demands or appropriately implement our strategic plans.




                                                                                                                                50
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Opportunities




Opportunities
Macroeconomic and market conditions
Should economic conditions, such as GDP growth or levels of unemployment, the interest rate environment and competitive
conditions in the financial services industry improve beyond forecasted levels, this could lead to increasing revenues, that may
only be partially offset by additional costs, thus improving both profit before taxes, net profit and the cost-income ratio directly
and subsequently improving regulatory measures, such as CET 1 and the leverage ratio. Higher inflation and interest rate
levels could present a number of opportunities for us across all our divisions, such as increased revenues from higher trading
flows amid private, corporate and institutional customers repositioning their portfolios, net interest income gains as well as,
higher margins on lending across our balance sheet.

A substantial proportion of the assets and liabilities on our balance sheet comprise financial instruments that we carry at fair
value, with changes in fair value recognized in our income statement. As a result of such changes, we may realize gains in
the future.

If market conditions, price levels, volatility and investor sentiment develop better than expected, this may also positively impact
our revenues, profits and our costs of lending. Similarly, if we experience higher levels of customer demand and market share
than anticipated, this may also positively affect our results of operations.

The increased availability of effective vaccines across the globe, including in emerging markets, could help accelerate the
underlying recovery rate across countries and mitigate the risk of new lockdowns or harsher government responses. Together
with easing pressure on supply chains, this could drive a pickup in cross-border trade, increased business and client activity
and could therefore lead to additional revenue potential. Certain industries may benefit more from the recovery, in particular
industries that have been more significantly impacted by the pandemic or recent supply chain bottlenecks could see a more
rapid recovery, thus resulting in additional business opportunities for us.


Regulatory change
Regulatory change can encourage banks to provide better products or services that can offer opportunities for differentiation
in the marketplace. For example, as reporting standards continue to develop for sustainable finance, the market may evolve
to embrace sustainable finance initiatives more broadly. As clients and the market adopt sustainable finance related initiatives,
we may have the opportunity to further differentiate the bank by enhancing the services provided to its clients.


Strategy

Our strategy seeks to enable us to materially improve returns to shareholders over time and deploy our balance sheet as well
as other resources to return activities consistent with our client franchise and risk appetite. As such, the implementation of our
strategy may create further opportunities if implemented to a greater extent or under more favorable conditions than
anticipated. This includes potential benefits from better than planned macroeconomic, market and geopolitical conditions. If
businesses and processes improve beyond our planned assumptions and cost efficiencies can be realized sooner or to a
greater extent than forecasted, this could also positively impact our results of operations. The progress could be further
stimulated if markets react favorably to our ongoing transformation efforts, Deutsche Bank rating upgrades and sustained
revenue performance. This could in turn reduce funding costs and further amplify the Bank’s profitability.

By investing in our areas of core strengths, we expect to pursue our strategy of targeted growth and to become the first point
of call for all our clients, addressing the full range of their financial needs – as their “Global Hausbank”. Our global network,
market expertise, comprehensive product range and our outstanding risk management, as recently evidenced by the Risk.net
Bank risk manager of the year award, should help setting us up for the next phase of our evolution which will focus on becoming
sustainably profitable by further growing our businesses while increasing efficiencies and maintaining capital discipline . Within
the Corporate Bank, we seek to continue to grow revenues in our home market of Germany but also expanding into Asia-
Pacific and leveraging the payments businesses to capture the value chain. We also see growing opportunities in new products
such as merchant solutions. The Investment Bank continues to be a global leader in fixed income and financing products, and
we are focused on defending our strong market position, retaining the market share gained over the last years and stabilizing
the franchise, while reducing costs. For the Private Bank, our focus remains on German retail, international retail and business
clients, and on seeking growth predominantly within advisory areas. With respect to our wealth management activities, we
see growth opportunities particularly in EMEA and APAC. Asset Management, comprising the DWS legal entities, have set a
strategy to pursue targeted growth, particularly in Europe to cement leading asset manager status and also in Asia and
anticipate launching new products in high margin growth areas and responsible investing. More broadly, we believ e that the
trend of assets shifting to Passive and to Alternatives solutions provides areas for growth in several parts of DWS.


                                                                                                                                 51
Deutsche Bank                                     Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                                Opportunities




We continue to focus on sustainability throughout the bank and have seen opportunities for growth in this space across all our
core businesses as our clients’ response to climate change gains further traction. In 2021, given the progress we have been
making in Sustainable Finance, we announced to bring our € 200 billion target for sustainable financing and investments
forward by two years to the end of 2022. Given strong client appetite, we continue to see Sustainable Finance as a key
opportunity and area of investment. As part of the broader efforts to develop a risk appetite strategy to manage climate risk,
we see opportunities to support our clients, for example, in developing credible decarbonization strategies and support their
transition.

Individuals and institutions, including clients and non-clients of ours, increasingly view environmental, social and governance
risks and opportunities as significant for long-term returns and we believe this to become a key differentiator. Interest in
dedicated drivers of ESG services such as inclusion of ESG factors in the investment processes or decision making process
for awarding business mandates across our businesses is growing. As such, we plan to develop and provide financial products
or investment possibilities that can help both us and our clients to achieve our common ESG goals and advance our holistic
ESG strategy. More broadly, we believe that advancing our ESG activities can lead to both additional revenues opportunities
but also an improved brand and stakeholder perception of us.

At the same time, we may benefit from opportunities to grow our market share and client base in the core bank, especially in
Europe and in our German home market, supporting clients where peers have retreated during the COVID-19 pandemic and
supporting the economy by ensuring corporates have the necessary working capital to manage though the uncertainties
ahead.

The COVID-19 pandemic has also impacted the bank’s cost structure. While in the short term we were required to equip
branches and office buildings with anti-infection supplies, we are now focusing on options to sustainably reduce costs including
real estate cost through continued higher levels of working from home, which has generally been positively received by
employees and can help accelerate our cost saving initiatives. Certain cost categories have been positively impacted by
COVID-19 temporarily, such as Travel & Entertainment and Marketing & Events.


Other intangible assets
Other intangible assets that are recognized separately from goodwill are tested for impairment at least annually. The
determination of the recoverable amount in the impairment assessment requires estimates based on quoted market prices,
prices of comparable businesses, present value or other valuation techniques, or a combination thereof, necessitating
management to make subjective judgments and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions could result in differences
to the amounts reported if underlying circumstances were to change. Depending upon changes in underlying assumptions,
the recoverable amount of a previously impaired other intangible asset may increase again in the future. In such a case we
may be able to write up the intangible asset to its original carrying amount and reverse prior impairments, resulting in a positive
impact on our profits.


Deferred Tax Assets
We recognize deferred tax assets for future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial
statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, unused tax losses and unused tax
credits. To the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable income will be available to allow all or a portion of
deferred tax assets to be utilized, we must reduce the carrying amounts and recognize valuation adjustments. Each quarter,
we re-evaluate our estimate related to deferred tax assets taking into account underlying assumptions about historical tax
capacity as well as future profitability. In connection with the transformation, in 2019, the Group recognized valuation
adjustments of €2.8 billion related to deferred tax assets in affected jurisdictions, such as the UK and the United States. Since
we embarked on the transformation in 2019, we made substantial progress on our key commitments and in the fourth quarter
of 2021, we recognized a positive DTA valuation adjustment of €274 million related to our strong US performance during 2021.
Depending upon our performance in affected jurisdictions going forward the carrying value of our deferred tax assets for which
we recognized valuation adjustments in connection with the transformation or prior to that may continue to recover over time.
This may result in the positive valuation adjustments in the future that would reduce our effective tax rate.




                                                                                                                                52
Deutsche Bank                                    Risks and Opportunities
Annual Report 2021                               Opportunities




Technology and Innovation
Digital Innovation offers various revenue opportunities to increase monetization on existing customers and acquire new
customer groups by expanding our own portfolio of products and engaging in product partnerships with third parties, thereby
potentially benefiting from a shorter time-to-market. Market trends such as the platform economy, matching internal and
external products with customer demands and transacting through one central platform, and open banking provide a clear
opportunity for us to position ourselves as a strong player in these ecosystems. The goal is to develop an ecosystem of
comprehensive services, with different components developed by different firms for areas like the retail deposit marketplace,
automated financial planning services (robo-advisor), or insurance recommendation services leveraging Deutsche Bank
banking platform. Furthermore, we have an opportunity to expand our data capabilities, to improve personalized services for
a better customer experience as well as to embrace disruptive technologies such as artificial intelligence to build out our
service offering. Our global reach allows us to scale products quickly and efficiently across geographies.

To drive change, accelerate the adoption of technologies into the bank and monetize on the above-mentioned market
opportunities, the Bank has one Technology, Data and Innovation (TDI) division. While general digitalization and innovation
activities happen within the business lines, this centralized approach enables us to address key strategic challenges in a
focused set-up, drive a culture of engineering and innovation and invest in mid to long term digital services and new business
models.

On the cost side, digitization offers our divisions an opportunity for significant efficiency gains. By investing in digital
applications such as digital client self-boarding, front-to-back processes can be automated, and the productivity increased.
Development of strong data capabilities should enhance our ability to make accurate predictions about client and market
behavior, reducing fraud and pricing products more efficiently, while complying with regulatory obligations using latest
technologies. To mitigate risks while working with data, Deutsche Bank has launched an internal Data Privacy Engineering
initiative. Again, the TDI organization is intended to serve as a focal point to accelerate selected strategic initiatives and to
bring overall cost down.

Deutsche Bank and Google formed a strategic partnership in late 2020. The multi-year cooperation aims to accelerate the
bank’s transition to the cloud and to co-innovate new products and services. The partnership will offer Deutsche Bank direct
access to world-class data science, artificial intelligence and machine learning capabilities that will result in improved client
insights, risk analytics and advanced security solutions to protect not only clients’ accounts but also by improve the bank’s
Anti Financial Crime processes, e.g. by enhancing KYC capabilities and Transaction Monitoring solutions.

The COVID-19 pandemic also brings potential opportunities including accelerating the process of digitalization across various
industries, enabling the bank to provide a faster service to customers through emerging digital touchpoints as well as the
opportunity to co-innovate and support clients with their investment in digitalization projects and strategies. Both of these
strengthen our client relationships and drive additional business.




                                                                                                                              53
Risk Report




55    Introduction
56    Risk and Capital overview
56    Key Risk Metrics
57    Risk Profile  
59    Risk and Capital framework
59    Risk Management principles
60    Risk Governance
62    Risk Appetite and capacity
63    Risk and Capital plan
65    Stress testing
66    Risk Measurement and Reporting Systems
67    Recovery and Resolution planning
68    Risk and Capital Management
68    Capital Management
68    Resource limit setting
69    Risk identification and assessment
69    Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality   118   Risk and Capital performance
98    Market Risk Management                     118   Capital, leverage ratio, TLAC and MREL
104   Operational Risk Management                134   Credit Risk Exposure
109   Liquidity Risk Management                  154   Trading Market Risk Exposures
114   Enterprise Risk Management                 157   Nontrading Market Risk Exposures
116   Model Risk Management                      159   Operational Risk Exposure
117   Reputational Risk Management               160   Liquidity Risk Exposure
Deutsche Bank                                     Introduction
Annual Report 2021                                Disclosures according to principles and recommendations of the Enhance d Disclosure Task Force
                                                  (EDTF)




Introduction

Disclosures in line with IFRS 7
The following Risk Report provides qualitative and quantitative disclosures about credit, market and other risks in line with the
requirements of International Financial Reporting Standard 7 (IFRS 7) Financial Instruments: Disclosures. It also considers
the underlying classification and measurement and impairment requirements in IFRS 9 with further details to be found in the
“Credit Risk Management and Model” section, in the “Asset quality” section, in the “Credit risk mitigation” section and in Note 1
“Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates” to the consolidated financial statements. Information which
forms part of and is incorporated by reference into the financial statements of this report is marked by a light blue shading
throughout this Risk Report.

European Regulation (EU) 2019/876 and Directive (EU) 2019/878 introduced amendments to the CRR/CRD with various
changes to the regulatory framework that became applicable for June 30, 2021: A new standardized approach for counterparty
credit risk (SA-CCR) was introduced that replaces the mark-to-market method to determine the exposure value for derivatives
that are not in scope of the internal model method. In addition, a new framework to determine the risk weight for banking book
investments in collective investment undertakings and default fund contributions to central counterparties was introduced.
Moreover, a minimum regulatory leverage ratio of 3 % is determined as the ratio of Tier 1 capital and the regulatory leverage
exposure. In addition, a minimum Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) of 100 % was introduced that requires banks to maintain
a stable funding profile in relation to their on and off balance sheet exposures.

In the third quarter of 2021, the Group introduced the new definition of default, which consists of two EBA guidelines. One
guideline comprises an EBA technical standard regarding the materiality threshold for credit obligations past due (implemented
with ECB regulation (EU) 2018/1845) and the second guideline covers the application of the definition of default. Both of these
new requirements are jointly referred to below as the new Definition of Default, after the ECB’s approval was received in
August 2021. The new Definition of Default replaced the default definition under Basel II and is applied to all key risk metrics
throughout the Annual Report including as a trigger to Stage 3 under IFRS 9.

Since June 30, 2020, the Group applies the transitional arrangements in relation to IFRS 9 as provided in the current CRR/CRD
for all CET1 measures.



Disclosures according to Pillar 3 of the Basel 3 Capital
Framework
Our disclosures according to Pillar 3 of the Basel 3 Capital Framework, which are implemented in the European Union by the
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms (Capital Requirements
Regulation or CRR), including recent amendments; and supported by the EBA guideline „Final draft implementing technical
standards on public disclosures by institutions of the information referred to in Titles II and III of Part Eight of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013“ and related guidelines applicable to Pillar 3 disclosures, are published in our additional Pillar 3 Report, which
can be found on our website.



Disclosures according to principles and recommendations of
the Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (EDTF)
In 2012 the Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (“EDTF”) was established as a private sector initiative under the auspices of the
Financial Stability Board (“FSB”), with the primary objective to develop fundamental principles for enhanced risk disclosures
and to recommend improvements to existing risk disclosures. As a member of the EDTF we adhere to the disclosure
recommendations in this Risk Report and also in our additional Pillar 3 report.




                                                                                                                                                   55
Deutsche Bank                                                    Risk and capital overview
Annual Report 2021                                               Key risk metrics




Risk and capital overview

Key risk metrics
As mentioned in the Outlook as well as in the Risks and Opportunities section above, the bank is exposed to a variety of
financial and non-financial risk factors. Although the macroeconomic, business and operating environment has improved over
the course of 2021 as the global economy experienced a strong recovery from the pandemic recession, downside risks to
economic activity and financial markets remain elevated as new COVID-19 variants are discovered, supply chain challenges
and rising energy prices grow more acute and geopolitical risks, including from China and Russia, increase.

The following selected key risk ratios and corresponding metrics form part of our holistic risk management across individual
risk types. The Common Equity Tier 1 ratio (CET 1), Economic Capital Adequacy (ECA) Ratio, Leverage ratio (LR), Total Loss
Absorbing Capacity (TLAC), Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL), Liquidity Coverage Ratio
(LCR), Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) and Stressed Net Liquidity Position (sNLP) serve as high-level metrics and are fully
integrated across strategic planning, risk appetite framework, and recovery and resolution planning practices, which are
reviewed and approved by our Management Board at least annually.



Common Equity Tier 1 Ratio                                                              Total Risk-Weighted Assets
31.12.2021                                                               13.2 %         31.12.2021                                              € 351.6 bn
31.12.2020                                                               13.6 %         31.12.2020                                              € 329.0 bn

Economic Capital Adequacy Ratio                                                         Total Economic Capital
31.12.2021                                                               206 %          31.12.2021                                               € 23.5 bn
31.12.2020                                                               179 %          31.12.2020                                               € 28.6 bn

Leverage Ratio (fully-loaded)                                                           Leverage Exposure
31.12.2021                                                                4.9 %         31.12.2021                                              € 1,125 bn
31.12.2020                                                                4.7 %         31.12.2020                                              € 1,078 bn

Total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC)                                                    Minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL)
31.12.2021 (Risk Weighted Asset based)                                   31.0 %         31.12.2021 ¹                                                32.7 %
31.12.2021 (Leverage Exposure based)                                      9.7 %         31.12.2020 ¹                                                10.7 %
31.12.2020 (Risk Weighted Asset based)                                   32.0 %
31.12.2020 (Leverage Exposure based)                                      9.8 %

Liquidity Coverage Ratio                                                                Stressed Net Liquidity Position (sNLP)
31.12.2021                                                               133 %          31.12.2021                                               € 47.6 bn
31.12.2020                                                               145 %          31.12.2020                                               € 43.0 bn

                                                                                        Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR)²
                                                                                        31.12.2021                                                  121 %


1
    For Dec 31, 2021 as percentage of RWA (requirement including the combined buffer requirement) and for Dec 31, 2020 as percentage of TLOF.
2
    The NSFR has been newly introduced as a minimum ratio by the CRR amendments effective June 28, 2021; therefore, no comparative is shown.


Moreover, we regularly assess the potential impacts of risks on our balance sheet and profitability through portfolio reviews
and stress tests. Stress tests are also used to test the resilience of Deutsche Bank’s strategic plans. The results of these tests
indicate that the currently available capital and liquidity reserves, in combination with available mitigation measures, are
sufficient to withstand periods of potential stress.

We conclude that the risks, as described above or in the following sections, to which Deutsche Bank is exposed to, including
potential impacts on our business strategy, provide a true and fair picture of our risk profile.

For further details please refer to sections “Risk profile”, “Risk appetite and capacity”, “Risk and capital plan”, “Stress testing”,
“Recovery and resolution planning”, “Risk and capital management”, “Capital, leverage ratio, TLAC and MREL” (for phase-in
and fully loaded figures), “Liquidity coverage ratio”, and “Stress testing and scenario analysis”.




                                                                                                                                                        56
Deutsche Bank                                                          Risk and capital overview
Annual Report 2021                                                     Risk profile




Risk profile
The table below shows our overall risk position as measured by the economic capital demand calculated for credit, market,
operational and strategic risk for the dates specified. To determine our overall economic risk position, we generally consider
diversification benefits across risk types.

Overall risk position as measured by economic capital demand by risk type
                                                                                                                                                           2021 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                                                          from 2020
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                              Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020                 in € m.                in %
Credit risk                                                                                                 11,725                11,636                    90                     1
Market risk                                                                                                  7,920                10,894                (2,974)                  (27)
  Trading market risk                                                                                        2,292                 2,198                    94                     4
  Nontrading market risk                                                                                     5,628                 8,696                (3,068)                  (35)
Operational risk                                                                                             4,937                 5,512                  (574)                  (10)
Strategic risk¹                                                                                              3,173                 5,949                (2,776)                  (47)
Diversification benefit²                                                                                    (4,213)               (5,429)                1,216                   (22)
Total economic capital demand                                                                               23,542                28,560                (5,018)                  (18)
1
    Formerly reported as business risk. This category includes the model output for strategic risk and tax risk, as well as capital charges for risk related to software assets and
    IFRS deferred tax assets on temporary differences.
2
    Diversification benefit across credit, market, operational and strategic risk.


As of December 31, 2021, our economic capital demand amounted to € 23.5 billion, which was € 5.0 billion or 18 % lower
than € 28.6 billion economic capital demand as of December 31, 2020.

The credit risk economic capital usage totaled € 11.7 billion as of December 31, 2021, which was € 0.1 billion or 1 % higher
compared to year-end 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the qualified adoption of the results of the ECB’s Targeted
Review of Internal Models (TRIM), which was partially offset by lower transfer and settlement risk.

The economic capital demand for market risk totaled € 7.9 billion as of December 31, 2021, which was € 3.0 billion or 27 %
lower compared to year-end 2020. The decrease was driven by nontrading market risk mainly due to reductions in the interest
rates exposure in the strategic liquidity reserve bond portfolio, as well as by changes in the calculation methodology for the
equity investment portfolio.

The operational risk economic capital usage totaled € 4.9 billion as of December 31, 2021, which was € 0.6 billion or 10 %
lower than the € 5.5 billion economic capital usage as of December 31, 2020. In line with the development of our RWA for
operational risk, the decrease was largely driven by a lighter internal loss profile, in particular lower loss frequency feed ing
into our capital model. For a detailed description see the section “Operational risk management”.

The strategic risk category captures the economic capital arising from the strategic risk model (which also implicitly includes
elements of nonstandard risks such as reputational risk), the tax risk model, and capital charges for the risk related to software
assets and IFRS deferred tax assets on temporary differences. The economic capital for strategic risk decreased to € 3.2
billion as of December 31, 2021 which was € 2.8 billion or 47 % lower compared to € 5.9 billion as of December 31, 2020,
which primarily reflects the improvement in the earnings outlook supported by the execution of Deutsche Bank’s
transformation.

The inter-risk diversification benefit of the economic capital demand across credit, market, operational and strategic risk totaled
€ 4.2 billion as of December 31, 2021, which was € 1.2 billion or 22 % lower compared to year-end 2020. This decrease mainly
reflects changes in the underlying risk type profile.

Our mix of business activities results in diverse risk taking by our business divisions. We also measure the key risks inherent
in their respective business models through the total economic capital metric, which mirrors each business division’s risk
profile and takes into account cross-risk effects at group level.




                                                                                                                                                                                      57
Deutsche Bank                                                        Risk and capital overview
Annual Report 2021                                                   Risk profile




Risk profile of our business divisions as measured by economic capital
                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021
in € m. (unless                   Corporate         Investment                               Asset               Capital        Corporate &                                   Total
stated otherwise)                     Bank                Bank       Private Bank       Management          Release Unit             Other                 Total             (in %)
Credit risk                          2,984               4,869              2,519                  60               376                 917            11,725                   50
Market risk                            306               2,094                570                  83               140               4,728             7,920                   34
Operational risk                       446               2,002                602                 269             1,619                   0             4,937                   21
Strategic risk¹                        242                  10                 32                   0                 1               2,888             3,173                   13
Diversification benefit²              (478)             (1,533)              (540)               (145)             (826)               (693)           (4,213)                 (18)
Total EC                             3,500               7,442              3,183                 267             1,309               7,840            23,542                 100
Total EC in %                           15                  32                 14                   1                 6                  33               100                 N/M
N/M – Not meaningful
1
  Formerly reported as business risk. This category includes the model output for strategic risk and tax risk, as well as capital charges for risk related to software assets and
  IFRS deferred tax assets on temporary differences.
2
  Diversification benefit across credit, market, operational and strategic risk.


                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2020³
in € m. (unless                   Corporate         Investment                               Asset               Capital        Corporate &                                   Total
stated otherwise)                     Bank                Bank       Private Bank       Management          Release Unit             Other                 Total             (in %)
Credit risk                          2,593               4,669              2,404                  60               648               1,262            11,636                   41
Market risk                            836               2,355              1,170                 420               235               5,877            10,894                   38
Operational risk                       482               2,169                646                 284             1,930                   0             5,512                   19
Strategic risk¹                        193               2,767                 80                   0                 0               2,909             5,949                   21
Diversification benefit²              (471)             (2,455)              (534)               (180)             (982)               (808)           (5,429)                 (19)
Total EC                             3,634               9,506              3,766                 584             1,831               9,239            28,560                 100
Total EC in %                           13                  33                 13                   2                 6                  32               100                 N/M
N/M – Not meaningful
1
  Formerly reported as business risk. This category includes the model output for strategic risk and tax risk, as well as capital charges for risk related to software assets and
  IFRS deferred tax assets on temporary differences.
2
  Diversification benefit across credit, market, operational and strategic risk.
3
  Risk amounts allocated to the business segments have been restated to reflect comparatives according to the structure as of December 31, 2021.


The Corporate Bank’s risk profile is dominated by its Trade Finance, Commercial Banking and Cash Management products
and services offered. Economic capital demand largely arises from credit risk and is predominantly driven by the Trade Finance
and Commercial Clients businesses. The economic capital demand for the Corporate Bank decreased by € 0.1 billion in
comparison to year-end 2020 mainly as a result of lower market risk, partly offset by higher credit risk. The economic capital
demand for market risk decreased by € 0.5 billion over the year mainly due to impact on the allocations to all businesses from
the changes in the calculation methodology for the equity investment portfolio. The economic capital demand for credit risk as
of December 31, 2021 was € 0.4 billion higher compared to year-end 2020 mainly driven by growth in Trade Finance and
Strategic Corporate Lending. The economic capital demand for operational and strategic risk in the Corporate Bank remained
fairly stable compared to year-end 2020.

The Investment Bank’s risk profile is dominated by its trading activities to support origination, structuring and market making
activities, which give rise to all major risk types. Credit risk in Investment Bank is broadly distributed across business units but
most prominent in Global Credit Trading, Rates and Leveraged Debt Capital Markets. Market risk arises mainly from trading
and market making activities. The remainder of Investment Bank’s risk profile is largely derived from strategic risk reflecting
earnings volatility risk. The economic capital demand for the Investment Bank decreased by € 2.1 billion in comparison to
year-end 2020 as a result of lower strategic risk, market risk, and operational risk. Economic capital demand for strategic risk
decreased by € 2.8 billion year-on-year driven by the improvement in the earnings outlook supported by the execution of
Deutsche Bank’s transformation. The economic capital demand for market risk decreased by € 0.3 billion over the year mainly
due to impact on the allocations to all businesses from the changes in the calculation methodology for the equity investment
portfolio. The economic capital demand for operational risk decreased by € 0.2 billion mainly driven be a lighter internal loss
profile, in particular a lower loss frequency. These reductions were partially offset by € 0.2 billion higher economic capital
demand for credit risk mainly driven by Global Credit Trading and reduced inter-risk diversification benefit of € 0.9 billion
compared to year-end 2020.

The Private Bank’s risk profile comprises business with German retail, international retail and business clients as well as
wealth management clients generating credit risks as well as non-trading market risks from investment risk, modelling of client
deposits and credit spread risk. The economic capital demand for the Private Bank decreased by € 0.6 billion in comparison
to year-end 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by a reduction in market risk of € 0.6 billion due to the transfer of the
liquidity reserve portfolio to Group Treasury within the Corporate & Other division at the beginning of 2021. The economic
capital for operational and strategic risks shows minor reductions over the year due to higher diversification effects with other
divisions. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in credit risk as a result of portfolio growth and methodology
changes related to new definition of default regulation.

Asset Management, as a fiduciary asset manager, invests money on behalf of clients. As such, the main risk drivers are non-
financial. The economic capital demand for market risk is mainly driven by non-trading market risks, which arise from
guarantee products and co-investments in the funds. The economic capital demand for Asset Management decreased by €
0.3 billion compared to previous year mainly driven by methodological enhancements in market risk models that have impacted


                                                                                                                                                                                    58
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                               Risk management principles




the allocations to the businesses and by a slight reduction in operational risk. This was partially offset by a reduction in the
diversification benefit.

The Capital Release Unit continued to exit and run down non-strategic assets over 2021. The de-risking across risk types
achieved throughout the year led to a reduction in economic capital demand of € 0.5 billion compared to year-end 2020. The
aforementioned decrease was partly offset by a reduced diversification benefit as a result of portfolio reduction in size and
complexity.

Corporate & Other’s risk profile mainly comprises non-trading market risks from structural foreign exchange risk, pension risk
and equity compensation risk, as well as strategic risk from the tax risk model and capital charges related to software assets
and IFRS deferred tax assets on temporary differences. The economic capital demand for Corporate & Other decreased by €
1.4 billion in comparison to year-end 2020 mainly due the rebalancing of our strategic liquidity reserve in response to market
conditions.


Risk and capital framework

Risk management principles
Our business model inherently involves taking risks. Risks can be financial and non-financial and include on and off-balance
sheet risks. Our objective is to create sustainable value in the interests of the company taking into consideration shareholders,
employees and other company related stakeholders. The risk management framework contributes to this by aligning our
planned and actual risk taking with our risk appetite as expressed by the Management Board, while being in line with our
available capital and liquidity.

Our risk management framework consists of various components. Principles and standards are set for each component:

– Organizational structures must follow the Three Lines of Defense (“3LoD”) model with a clear definition of roles and
  responsibilities for all risk types.
  – The 1st Line of Defense (“1st LoD”) refers to those roles in the Bank whose activities generate risks, whether financial
     or non-financial, and who own and are accountable for these risks. The 1st LoD manages these risks within the defined
     risk appetite, establishes an appropriate risk governance and risk culture, and adheres to the risk type frameworks
     defined by the 2nd Line of Defense (“2nd LoD”).
  – The 2nd LoD refers to the roles in the Bank who define the risk management framework for a specific risk type. The 2nd
     LoD independently assesses and challenges the implementation of the risk type framework and adherence to the risk
     appetite, and acts as an advisor to the 1st LoD on how to identify, assess and manage risks.
  – The 3rd Line of Defense (“3rd LoD”) is Group Audit, which is accountable for providing independent and objective
     assurance on the adequacy of the design, operating effectiveness and efficiency of the risk management system and
     systems of internal control.
– Every employee must act as a risk manager consistent with our risk appetite, risk management standards and values.
– The Management Board approved risk appetite must be cascaded and adhered to across all dimensions of the Group, with
  appropriate consequences in the event of a breach.
– Risks must be identified and assessed.
– Risks must be actively managed including appropriate risk mitigation and effective internal control systems.
– Risks must be measured and reported using accurate, complete and timely data using approved models.
– Regular stress tests must be performed against adverse scenarios and appropriate crisis response planning must be
  established.

We promote a strong risk culture where every employee must fully understand and take a holistic view of the risks which could
result from their actions, understand the consequences and manage them appropriately against our risk appetite. We expect
employees to exhibit behaviors that support a strong risk culture in line with our Code of Conduct. To promote this, our policies
require that risks taken (including against risk appetite) must be taken into account during our performance assessment and
compensation processes. This expectation continues to be reinforced through communications campaigns and mandatory
training courses for all Deutsche Bank employees. In addition, our Management Board members and senior management
frequently communicate the importance of a strong risk culture to support a consistent tone from the top.




                                                                                                                              59
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                               Risk governance




Risk governance
Our operations throughout the world are regulated and supervised by relevant authorities in each of the jurisdictions in which
we conduct business. Such regulation focuses on licensing, capital adequacy, liquidity, risk concentration, conduct of business
as well as organizational and reporting requirements. The European Central Bank (the “ECB”) in connection with the
competent authorities of EU countries which joined the Single Supervisory Mechanism via the Joint Supervisory Team act in
cooperation as our primary supervisors to monitor our compliance with the German Banking Act and other applicable laws
and regulations.

Several layers of management provide cohesive risk governance:

– The Supervisory Board is informed regularly on our risk situation, risk management and risk controlling, including
  reputational risk related items as well as material litigation cases. It has formed various committees to handle specific top ics
  (for a detailed description of these committees, please see the “Corporate Governance Report” under “Management Board
  and Supervisory Board”, “Standing Committees”).
  – At the meetings of the Risk Committee, the Management Board reports on current and forward-looking risk exposures,
      portfolios, on risk appetite and strategy and on matters deemed relevant for the assessment and oversight of the risk
      situation of Deutsche Bank AG. It also reports on loans requiring a Supervisory Board resolution pursuant to law or the
      Articles of Association. The Risk Committee advises on issues related to the overall risk appetite, aggregate risk position
      and the risk strategy and keeps the Supervisory Board informed of its activities.
  – The Integrity Committee, among other responsibilities, advises and monitors the Management Board with regard to the
      management’s commitment to an economically sound, sustainable development of the company, monitors the
      Management Board’s measures that promote the company’s compliance with legal requirements, authorities’
      regulations and the company’s own policies, including risk policies. It also reviews the Bank’s codes of conduct and
      ethics, and, upon request, supports the Risk Committee in monitoring and analyzing the Bank’s legal and reputational
      risks.
  – The Audit Committee, among other matters, monitors the effectiveness of the risk management system, particularly the
      internal control system and the internal audit system.
– The Management Board is responsible for managing Deutsche Bank Group in accordance with the law, the Articles of
  Association and its Terms of Reference with the objective of creating sustainable value in the interest of the company, thus
  taking into consideration the interests of the shareholders, employees and other company related stakeholders. The
  Management Board is responsible for ensuring a proper business organization, encompassing appropriate and effective
  risk management, as well as compliance with legal requirements and internal guidelines. The Management Board
  established the Group Risk Committee (“GRC”) as the central forum for review and decision on material risk and capital-
  related topics. The GRC generally meets once a week. It has delegated some of its duties to individuals and sub-
  committees. The GRC and its sub-committees are described in more detail below.




                                                                                                                                60
Deutsche Bank                                   Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                              Risk governance




Risk management governance structure of the Deutsche Bank Group




The following functional committees are central to the management of risk at Deutsche Bank:

– The Group Risk Committee (GRC) has various duties and dedicated authority, including approval of new or materially
  changed risk and capital models and review of the inventory of risks, high-level risk portfolios, risk exposure developments,
  and internal and regulatory Group-wide stress testing results. In addition, the GRC reviews and recommends items for
  Management Board approval, such as key risk management principles, the Group Risk Appetite Statement, the Group
  Recovery Plan and the Contingency Funding Plan, over-arching risk appetite parameters, and recovery and escalation
  indicators. The GRC also supports the Management Board during Group-wide risk and capital planning processes.
  – The Non-Financial Risk Committee (NFRC) oversees, governs and coordinates the management of non-financial risks
     in Deutsche Bank Group and establishes a cross-risk and holistic perspective of the key non-financial risks of the Group,
     including conduct and financial crime risk. It is tasked to define the non-financial risk appetite tolerance framework, to
     monitor and control the effectiveness of the non-financial risk operating model (including interdependencies between
     business divisions and control functions), and to monitor the development of emerging non-financial risks relevant for
     the Group.
  – The Group Reputational Risk Committee (GRRC) is responsible for the oversight, governance and coordination of
     reputational risk management and provides for a look-back and a lessons learnt process. It reviews and decides all
     reputational risk issues escalated by the Regional Reputational Risk Committees (RRRCs) and RRRC decisions which
     have been appealed by the business divisions, infrastructure functions or regional management. It provides guidance
     on Group-wide reputational risk matters, including communication of sensitive topics, to the appropriate levels of
     Deutsche Bank Group. The RRRCs which are sub-committees of the GRRC, are responsible for the oversight,
     governance and coordination of the management of reputational risk in the respective regions on behalf of the
     Management Board.
  – The Enterprise Risk Committee (ERC) has been established with a mandate to focus on enterprise-wide risk trends,
     events and cross-risk portfolios, bringing together risk experts from various risk disciplines. As part of its mandate, the
     ERC approves the group risk inventory, certain country and industry threshold increases, and scenario design outlines
     for more severe group-wide stress tests as well as reverse stress tests. It reviews group-wide stress test results in
     accordance with risk appetite, reviews the risk outlook, emerging risks and topics with enterprise-wide risk implications.




                                                                                                                             61
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                                Risk appetite and capacity




  – The Product Governance Committee has the mandate to ensure that there is appropriate oversight, governance and
      coordination of Product Governance in the Group by establishing a cross-risk and holistic perspective of key financial
      and non-financial risks associated with products and transactions throughout the lifecycle.
– The Financial Resource Management Council (FRMC) is an ad-hoc governance body, chaired by the Chief Financial Officer
  and the Chief Risk Officer with delegated authority from the Management Board, to oversee financial crisis management
  at the bank. The FRMC provides a single forum to oversee execution of both the Contingency Funding Plan and the Group
  Recovery Plan. The council recommends upon mitigating actions to be taken in a time of anticipated or actual capital or
  liquidity stress. Specifically, the FRMC is tasked with analyzing the bank’s capital and liquidity position, in anticipation of a
  stress scenario recommending proposals for capital and liquidity related matters, and oversee execution of decisions.
– The Group Asset & Liability Committee has been established by the Management Board. Its mandate is to optimize the
  sourcing and deployment of the bank’s balance sheet and financial resources within the overarching risk appetite set by
  the Management Board.

Our Chief Risk Officer (CRO), who is a member of the Management Board, has Group-wide, supra-divisional responsibility for
establishing a risk management framework with appropriate identification, measurement, monitoring, mitigation and reporting
of liquidity, credit, market, enterprise, model and non-financial risks (including operational and reputational). However,
frameworks for certain risks are established by other functions as per the business allocation plan.

The CRO has direct management responsibility for the CRO function. Risk management & control duties in the CRO function
are generally assigned to specialized risk management units focusing on the management of

   – Specific risk types
   – Risks within a specific business
   – Risks in a specific region.

These specialized risk management units generally handle the following core tasks:

   – Foster consistency with the risk appetite set by the Management Board and applied to Business Divisions and their
     Business Units;
   – Determine and implement risk and capital management policies, procedures and methodologies that are appropriate to
     the businesses within each division;
   – Establish and approve risk limits;
   – Conduct periodic portfolio reviews to keep the portfolio of risks within acceptable parameters; and
   – Develop and implement risk and capital management infrastructures and systems that are appropriate for each division.

Chief Risk Officers for each business division, having a holistic view of the respective business, challenge and influence the
divisions’ strategies, risk awareness and ownership as well as their adherence to risk appetite.

Responsibility for Compliance and Anti-Financial Crime has transferred from the Chief Risk Officer to the Chief Administrative
Officer in the first half of 2021.

While operating independently from each other and the business divisions, our Finance and Risk functions have the joint
responsibility to quantify and verify the risk that we assume.



Risk appetite and capacity
Risk appetite expresses the aggregate level and types of risk that we are willing to assume to achieve our strategic objectives,
as defined by a set of quantitative metrics and qualitative statements. Risk capacity is defined as the maximum level of risk
we can assume given our capital and liquidity base, risk management and control capabilities, and our regulatory constraints.

Risk appetite is an integral element in our business planning processes via our risk strategy and plan, to promote the
appropriate alignment of risk, capital and performance targets, while at the same time considering risk capacity and appetite
constraints from both financial and non-financial risks. Compliance of the plan with our risk appetite and capacity is also tested
under stressed market conditions. Top-down risk appetite serves as the limit for risk-taking for the bottom-up planning from
the business functions.

The Management Board reviews and approves our risk appetite and capacity on an annual basis, or more frequently in t he
event of unexpected changes to the risk environment, with the aim of ensuring that they are consistent with our Group’s
strategy, business and regulatory environment and stakeholders’ requirements.




                                                                                                                                62
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                                Risk and capital plan




In order to determine our risk appetite and capacity, we set different group level triggers and thresholds on a forward-looking
basis and define the escalation requirements for further action. We assign risk metrics that are sensitive to the material risks
to which we are exposed and which function as indicators of financial health. In addition to that, we link our risk and recovery
management governance framework with the risk appetite framework.

Reports relating to our risk profile as compared to our risk appetite and strategy and our monitoring thereof are presented
regularly up to the Management Board. In the event that our desired risk appetite is breached, a predefined escalation
governance matrix is applied so these breaches are highlighted to the appropriate governance bodies.



Risk and capital plan
Strategic and capital plan
We conduct annually an integrated strategic planning process which lays out the development of our future strategic direction
for us as a Group and for our business areas. The strategic plan aims to create a holistic perspective on capital, funding and
risk under risk-return considerations. This process translates our long-term strategic targets into measurable short- to medium-
term financial targets and enables intra-year performance monitoring and management. Thereby we aim to identify growth
options by considering the risks involved and the allocation of available capital resources to drive sustainable performance.
Risk-specific portfolio strategies complement this framework and allow for an in-depth implementation of the risk strategy on
portfolio level, addressing risk specifics including risk concentrations.

The strategic planning process consists of two phases: a top-down target setting and a bottom-up substantiation.

In a first phase – the top-down target setting – our key targets for profit and loss (including revenues and costs), capital supply,
capital demand as well as leverage, funding and liquidity are discussed for the group and the key business areas. In this
process, the targets for the next five years are based on our global macro-economic outlook and the expected regulatory
framework. Subsequently, the targets are approved by the Management Board.

In a second phase, the top-down objectives are substantiated bottom-up by detailed business unit plans, which consist of a
month by month operative plan; years two and three are planned per quarter and years four and five are annual plans. The
proposed bottom-up plans are reviewed and challenged by Finance and Risk and are discussed individually with the business
heads. Thereby, the specifics of the business are considered and concrete targets decided in line with our strategic direction.
The bottom-up plans include targets for key legal entities to review local risk and capitalization levels. Stress tests complement
the strategic plan to also consider stressed market conditions.

The resulting Strategic and Capital Plan is presented to the Management Board for discussion and approval. The final plan is
presented to the Supervisory Board.

The Strategic and Capital Plan is designed to support our vision of being a leading German bank with strong European roots
and a global network and aims to ensure:

–   Balanced risk adjusted performance across business areas and units;
–   High risk management standards with focus on risk concentrations;
–   Compliance with regulatory requirements;
–   Strong capital and liquidity position; and
–   Stable funding and liquidity strategy allowing for business planning within the liquidity risk appetite and regulatory
    requirements.

The Strategic and Capital Planning process allows us to:

– Set earnings and key risk and capital adequacy targets considering the bank’s strategic focus and business plans;
– Assess our capital adequacy with regard to internal and external requirements (i.e., economic capital and regulatory
  capital); and
– Apply appropriate stress test analyses’ to assess the impact on capital demand, capital supply and liquidity.

All externally communicated financial targets are monitored on an ongoing basis in appropriate management committees. Any
projected shortfall versus targets is discussed together with potential mitigating strategies with the aim to ensure that we
remain on track to achieve our targets. Amendments to the strategic and capital plan must be approved by the Management
Board. Achieving our externally communicated solvency targets ensures that we also comply with the solvency ratio-related
Group Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) requirements as articulated by our home supervisor.



                                                                                                                                 63
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                               Risk and capital plan




On December 9, 2019, Deutsche Bank was informed by the ECB of its decision regarding prudential minimum capital
requirements for 2020 that applied from January 1, 2020 onwards, following the results of the 2019 SREP. The decision set
ECB’s Pillar 2 Requirement (P2R) to 2.50 % of RWA, effective as of January 1, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, Deutsche
Bank needs to maintain on a consolidated basis a CET 1 ratio of at least 10.43 %, a Tier 1 ratio of at least 12.40 % and a
Total Capital ratio of at least 15.03 %. The CET 1 requirement comprises the Pillar 1 minimum capital requirement of 4.50 %,
the Pillar 2 requirement (SREP add-on) of 1.41 %, the capital conservation buffer of 2.50 %, the countercyclical buffer (subject
to changes throughout the year) of 0.03 % and the higher of our G-SII/O-SII buffer of 2.00 %. Correspondingly, the Tier 1
capital requirement includes additionally a Tier 1 minimum capital requirement of 1.50 % plus a Pillar 2 requirement of 0.47 %,
and the Total Capital requirement includes further a Tier 2 minimum capital requirement of 2.00 % and a Pillar 2 requirement
of 0.63 %. Also, the ECB communicated to Deutsche Bank that its individual expectation to hold a further Pillar 2 CET 1 capital
add-on, commonly referred to as ‘Pillar 2 guidance’ will be seen as guidance only and – until at least year-end 2022 – a breach
of this guidance will not trigger the need to provide a capital restoration plan or a need to execute measures to re-build CET 1
capital.

In February 2022, the ECB informed us of its decision effective 1 March 2022 that our Pillar 2 Requirement remains
unchanged. In 2021, Deutsche Bank has participated in the EBA Stress Test 2021 which was postponed from 2020 due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. By its standard procedures, the ECB has considered our quantitative performance in the adverse
scenario as an input when reconsidering the level of the Pillar 2 Guidance in its 2021 SREP assessment and our qualitative
performance as one aspect when holistically reviewing the Pillar 2 Requirement.

In January 2022, the BaFin announced a countercyclical buffer of 0.75 % for Germany effective February 1, 2023, which
translates into approximately 30 bps CET1 capital requirement for Deutsche Bank Group given our current share of German
credit exposures. Additionally, the BaFin is considering a sectoral systemic risk buffer of 2 % for German residential real estate
exposures effective February 1, 2023. If implemented as considered, this sectoral buffer could increase the CET1 capital
requirement for Deutsche Bank Group by approximately 20 bps, considering our current German residential real estate
exposure.

It should be noted that the Financial Stability Board announced in 2019 that our G-SII buffer was reduced to 1.5 % effective
from January 1, 2021. This however does not change the Banks’ capital requirements as the O-SII buffer remains at 2.0 %.


Internal capital adequacy assessment process
Deutsche Bank’s internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) consists of several well-established components
which ensure that Deutsche Bank maintains sufficient capital to cover the risks to which the bank is exposed on an ongoing
basis:

– Risk identification and assessment: The risk identification process forms the basis of the ICAAP and results in an inventory
  of risks for the Group. All risks identified are assessed for their materiality. Further details can be found in section “Risk
  identification and assessment”.
– Capital demand/risk measurement: Risk measurement methodologies and models are applied to quantify the regulatory
  and economic capital demand which is required to cover all material risks except for those which cannot be adequately
  limited by capital e.g. liquidity risk. Further details can be found in sections “Risk profile” and “Capital, Leverage Ratio,
  TLAC and MREL”.
– Capital supply: Capital supply quantification refers to the definition of available capital resources to absorb unexpected
  losses. Further details can be found in sections “Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL” and “Economic Capital
  Adequacy”.
– Risk appetite: Deutsche Bank has established a set of qualitative statements, quantitative metrics and thresholds which
  express the level of risk that we are willing to assume to achieve our strategic objectives. Threshold breaches are subject
  to a dedicated governance framework triggering management actions aimed to safeguard capital adequacy. Further details
  can be found in sections “Risk appetite and capacity” and “Key risk metrics”.
– Capital planning: The risk appetite thresholds for capital adequacy metrics constitute boundaries which have to be met in
  the capital plan to safeguard capital adequacy on a forward-looking basis. Further details can be found in section “Strategic
  and capital plan”.
– Stress testing: Capital plan figures are also considered under various stress test scenarios to prove resilience and overall
  viability of the bank. Regulatory and economic capital adequacy metrics are also subject to regular stress tests throughout
  the year to constantly evaluate Deutsche Bank’s capital position in hypothetical stress scenarios and to detect
  vulnerabilities under stress. Further details can be found in section “Stress testing”.
– Capital adequacy assessment: Although capital adequacy is constantly monitored throughout the year, the ICAAP
  concludes with a dedicated annual capital adequacy statement (CAS). The assessment consists of a Management Board
  statement about Deutsche Bank’s capital adequacy, which is linked to specific conclusions and management actions to be
  taken to safeguard capital adequacy on a forward-looking basis.




                                                                                                                               64
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                                 Stress testing




As part of its ICAAP, Deutsche Bank distinguishes between a normative and economic internal perspective. The normative
internal perspective refers to a multi-year assessment of the ability to fulfil all capital-related legal requirements and supervisory
demands on an ongoing basis under a baseline and adverse scenario. The economic internal perspective refers to an internal
process using internal economic capital demand models and an internal economic capital supply definition. Both perspectives
focus on maintaining the continuity of Deutsche Bank on an ongoing basis.



Stress testing
Deutsche Bank has implemented a stress test framework to satisfy internal as well as external stress test requirements. The
internal stress tests are based on in-house developed methods and inform a variety of risk management use cases (risk type
specific as well as cross risk). Internal stress tests form an integral part of our risk management framework complementing
traditional risk measures. The cross-risk stress test framework, the Group Wide Stress Test Framework (GWST), serves a
variety of bank management processes, in particular the strategic planning process, the ICAAP, the risk appetite framework
and capital allocation. Capital plan stress testing is performed to assess the viability of our capital plan in adverse
circumstances and to demonstrate a clear link between risk appetite, business strategy, capital plan and stress testing. The
regulatory stress tests, e.g. the EBA stress test and the US-based CCAR (Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review) stress
tests, are strictly following the processes and methodologies as prescribed by the regulatory authorities.

Our internal stress tests are performed on a regular basis in order to assess the impact of a severe economic downturn as
well as adverse bank-specific events on our risk profile and financial position. Our stress testing framework comprises regular
sensitivity-based and scenario-based approaches addressing different severities and regional hotspots. We include all
material risk types into our stress testing activities. These activities are complemented by portfolio- and country-specific
downside analysis as well as further regulatory requirements, such as annual reverse stress tests and additional stress tests
requested by our regulators on group or legal entity level. Our methodologies undergo regular scrutiny from Deutsche Bank’s
internal validation team (Model Risk Management) whether they correctly capture the impact of a given stress scenario.

The initial phase of our cross-risk stress test consists of defining a macroeconomic downturn scenario by ERM Risk Research
in cooperation with business specialists through a formal governance forum Scenario Design Council. ERM Risk Research
monitors the political and economic development around the world and maintains a macro-economic heat map that identifies
potentially harmful scenarios. Based on quantitative models and expert judgments, economic parameters such as foreign
exchange rates, interest rates, GDP growth or unemployment rates are set accordingly to reflect the impact on our business.
The scenario parameters are translated into specific risk drivers by subject matter experts in the risk units. Based on our
internal models’ framework for stress testing, the following major metrics are calculated under stress: risk-weighted assets,
impacts on profit and loss and economic capital by risk type. These results are aggregated at the Group level, and key metrics
such as the CET 1 ratio, ECA ratio, MREL ratio and Leverage Ratio under stress are derived. Stress impacts on the Liquidity
Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Liquidity Reserve are also considered. The time-horizon of internal stress tests is between one
and five years, depending on the use case and scenario assumptions. The Enterprise Risk Committee (ERC) reviews the final
stress results. After comparing these results against our defined risk appetite, the ERC also discusses specific mitigation
actions to remediate the stress impact in alignment with the overall strategic and capital plan if certain limits are breache d.
The results also feed into the recovery planning which is crucial for the recoverability of the Bank in times of crisis. The outcome
is presented to senior management up to the Management Board to raise awareness on the highest level as it provides key
insights into specific business vulnerabilities and contributes to the overall risk profile assessment of the bank.

The group wide stress tests performed in 2021 indicated that the bank’s capitalization together with available mitigation
measures as defined in the Group Recovery Plan allow it to reach the internally set stress exit level.

The cross-risk reverse stress test leverages the GWST framework and is typically performed annually in order to challenge
our business model by determining scenarios which would cause us to become unviable. Such a reverse stress test is based
on a hypothetical macroeconomic scenario enriched by idiosyncratic events based on the top risks monitored by each risk
type. Comparing such a hypothetical scenario resulting in the Bank’s non-viability to the current economic environment, we
consider the probability of occurrence of such a hypothetical stress scenario as extremely low. Given this, we do not believe
that our business continuity is at risk.
Starting end of 2020, we have further strengthened our framework by increasing the frequency of our Risk Appetite scenario
to monthly thereby enabling a more rigorous risk appetite monitoring.

In addition to the GWST that includes all material risk types and major revenue streams, we have individual stress test
programs in place for all relevant risk metrics in line with regulatory requirements. For the relevant stress test programs, we
refer to the sections describing the individual risk management methods.

Deutsche Bank also took part in two major regulatory stress tests performed in 2021 i.e. the bi-annual European EBA stress
test as well as the US-based CCAR stress test, as implemented pursuant to the US Dodd-Frank Act.


                                                                                                                                   65
Deutsche Bank                                        Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                                   Risk measurement and reporting systems




GWST framework of Deutsche Bank Group



                                                                              Finance:
                                                                              Capital plan

                                                                                                                          Senior
                                                                                                                        Management:
                                                                                                                        No action required
    ERM Risk                Risk Units:              Risk Units:         Central Function:       Central Function:
    Research:            Parameter translation    Calculation engines        Calculation of       Comparison against
 Scenario definition                                                       aggregated impact         risk appetite        Senior
  Research defines       Scenario parameters       Teams run risk-           Calculation of       Stress results are    Management:
scenario with several      are translated into    specific calculation     aggregated stress      compared against           Actions
risk parameters such      risk-specific drivers   engines to arrive at      impact based on      risk appetite and in
                                                                                                                        Strategic decision
as FX, interest rates,                             stressed results          capital plan for     case of breaches
                                                                                                                        on adequate risk
     growth, etc.                                                         several metrics such    mitigation actions
                                                                                                                           mitigation or
                                                                          as RWA, CET1, etc.        are considered
                                                                                                                         reduction from a
                                                                                                                        catalogue of pre-
                                                                                                                           determined
                                                                                                                           alternatives




Risk measurement and reporting systems
Our risk measurement systems support regulatory reporting and external disclosures, as well as internal management
reporting across credit, market, liquidity, operational, reputational, enterprise and model risks. The risk infrastructure
incorporates the relevant legal entities and business divisions and provides the basis for reporting on risk positions, capital
adequacy and limit, threshold or target utilization to the relevant functions on a regular and ad-hoc basis. Established units
within the CFO and CRO-Function assume responsibility for measurement, analysis and reporting of risk while promoting
sufficient quality and integrity of risk-related data. Our risk management systems are reviewed by Group Audit following a risk-
based audit approach.

Deutsche Bank’s reporting is an integral part of Deutsche Bank’s risk management approach and as such aligns with the
organizational setup by delivering consistent information on Group level and for material legal entities as well as breakdowns
by risk types, business division and material business units.

The following principles guide Deutsche Bank’s “risk measurement and reporting” practices:

– Deutsche Bank monitors risks taken against risk appetite and risk-reward considerations on various levels across the
  Group, e.g. Group, business divisions, material business units, material legal entities, risk types, portfolio and counterparty
  levels.
– Risk reporting is required to be accurate, clear, useful and complete and must convey reconciled and validated risk data to
  communicate information in a concise manner to ensure, across material Financial and Non-Financial Risks, the bank’s
  risk profile is clearly understood.
– Senior risk committees, such as the Enterprise Risk Committee (ERC) and the Group Risk Committee (GRC), as well as
  the Management Board who are responsible for risk and capital management receive regular reporting (as well as ad-hoc
  reporting as required).
– Dedicated teams within Deutsche Bank proactively manage material Financial and Non-Financial Risks and must ensure
  that required management information is in place to enable proactive identification and management of risks and avoid
  undue concentrations within a specific Risk Type and across risks (Cross-Risk view).

In applying the previously mentioned principles, Deutsche Bank maintains a common basis for all risk reports and aims to
minimize segregated reporting efforts to allow Deutsche Bank to provide consistent information, which only differs by
granularity and audience focus.

The Bank identifies a large number of metrics within its risk measurement systems which support regulatory reporting and
external disclosures, as well as internal management reporting across risks and for material risk types. Deutsche Bank
designates a subset of those as “Key Risk Metrics” that represent the most critical ones for which the Bank places an appetite,
limit, threshold or target at Group level and / or are reported routinely to senior management for discussion or decision making.
The identified Key Risk Metrics include Capital Adequacy and Liquidity metrics; further details can be found in the section
“Key risk metrics”.




                                                                                                                                       66
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and capital framework
Annual Report 2021                                 Recovery and resolution planning




While a large number of reports are used across the Bank, Deutsche Bank designates a subset of these as “Key Risk Reports”
that are critical to support Deutsche Bank’s Risk Management Framework through the provision of risk information to senior
management and therefore enable the relevant governing bodies to monitor, steer and control the Bank’s risk taking activities
effectively. To ensure that Key Risk Reports meet recipients’ requirements, report producing functions regularly check whether
the Key Risk Reports are clear and useful.

The main reports on risk and capital management that are used to provide Deutsche Bank’s central governance bodies with
information relating to the Group risk profile are the following:

– The monthly Risk and Capital Profile (RCP) report is a Cross-Risk report, provides a comprehensive view of Deutsche
  Bank’s risk profile and is used to inform the ERC, the GRC as well as the Management Board and subsequently the Risk
  Committee of the Supervisory Board. The RCP includes Risk Type specific and Business-Aligned overviews and
  Enterprise-wide risk topics. It also includes updates on Key Group Risk Appetite Metrics and other Key Portfolio Risk Type
  Control Metrics as well as updates on Key Risk Developments, highlighting areas of particular interest with updates on
  corresponding risk management strategies.
– The Weekly Risk Report (WRR) is a weekly briefing covering high-level topical issues across key risk areas and is submitted
  every Friday to the Members of the ERC, the GRC and the Management Board and subsequently to the Members of the
  Risk Committee of the Supervisory Board. The WRR is characterized by the ad-hoc nature of its commentary as well as
  coverage of themes and focuses on more volatile risk metrics.
– Deutsche Bank runs several Group-wide macroeconomic stress tests. A monthly Risk Appetite scenario serves the purpose
  to set and regularly monitor our stress loss appetite. In addition, there are topical scenarios (typically once per quarter)
  which are reported to and discussed in the ERC and escalated to the GRC if deemed necessary. The stressed key
  performance indicators are benchmarked against the Group Risk Appetite thresholds.

While the above reports are used at a Group level to monitor and review the risk profile of Deutsche Bank holistically, there
are other, supplementing standard and ad-hoc management reports, including for Risk Types or Focus Portfolios, which are
used to monitor and control the risk profile.



Recovery and resolution planning
In the EU, the Single Resolution Mechanism Regulation (“SRM Regulation”) and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive
(“BRRD”) aim at reducing the likelihood of another financial crisis, enhance the resilience of institutions under stress, and
eventually support the long-term stability of the financial systems without exposing taxpayers’ money to losses.

In line with the provisions of the SRM Regulation and the BRRD (which were mainly implemented in Germany by the German
Recovery and Resolution Act (Sanierungs- und Abwicklungsgesetz – “SAG”)), we maintain our recovery and resolution
planning framework designed to identify and manage the impact of adverse events in a timely and coordinated manner.

We maintain a Group recovery plan which is approved by the Management Board. The latest submission in 2021 includes,
inter alia:

– Updated overall recovery capacity which has been assessed against two severe stress scenarios and is deemed sufficient
  to withstand severe capital and liquidity stress; and
– All Recovery metrics levels have been aligned to the new Group risk appetite and new recovery / early warning metrics
  have been added.

The Group resolution plan on the other hand is prepared by the resolution authorities, rather than by the bank itself. We work
closely with the Single Resolution Board (SRB) and the Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht (“BaFin”) who
establish the Group resolution plan for Deutsche Bank, which is currently based on a single point of entry (SPE) bail-in as the
preferred resolution strategy. Under the SPE bail-in strategy, the parent entity Deutsche Bank AG would be recapitalized
through a write-down and/or conversion to equity of capital instruments (Common Equity Tier 1, Additional Tier 1, Tier 2) and
other eligible liabilities in order to stabilize the Group. Within one month after the application of the bail-in tool to recapitalize
an institution, the BRRD (as implemented in the SAG) requires such institution to prepare a business reorganization plan,
addressing the causes of failure and aiming to restore the institution's long-term viability. To further support and improve
operational continuity of the bank for resolution planning purposes, DB has largely completed additional preparations, such
as adding termination stay clauses into client financial agreements governed by non-EU law and including continuity provisions
into key service agreements. Financial contracts and service agreements governed by EU law are already covered by statutory
laws which prevent termination solely due to any resolution measure.

The BRRD requires banks in EU member states to maintain minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities
(“MREL”) to make resolution credible by establishing sufficient loss absorption and recapitalization capacity. Apart from MREL-



                                                                                                                                   67
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Resource limit setting




requirements, Deutsche Bank, as a global systemically important bank, is subject to global minimum standards for Total Loss-
Absorbing Capacity (“TLAC”), which set out strict requirements for the amount and eligibility of instruments to be maintained
for bail-in purposes. In particular, TLAC instruments must be subordinated (including so-called senior “non-preferred” debt,
but also in the form of regulatory capital instruments) to other senior liabilities. This ensures that a bail-in would be applied
first to equity and TLAC instruments, which must be exhausted before a bail-in may affect other senior (“preferred”) liabilities
such as senior preferred plain vanilla bonds, debt instruments that are “structured”, deposits and derivatives.

In the United States, Deutsche Bank AG is required under Title I of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act (the “Dodd-Frank Act”), as amended, to prepare and submit to the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) either a full or targeted resolution plan (the “U.S. Resolution Plan”) on a timeline
prescribed by such agencies. The U.S. Resolution Plan must demonstrate that Deutsche Bank AG has the ability to execute
and implement a strategy for the orderly resolution of its designated material U.S. entities and operations. For foreign-based
companies subject to these resolution planning requirements such as Deutsche Bank AG, the U.S. Resolution Plan relates
only to subsidiaries, branches, agencies and businesses that are domiciled in or whose activities are carried out in whole or
in material part in the United States.

Deutsche Bank AG filed its most recent U.S. Resolution Plan in December 2021 and is currently awaiting written regulatory
feedback. This targeted resolution plan submission provides detailed information on our U.S. Resolution Strategy, our
resolution capabilities in the U.S., material changes made to our U.S. Resolution Plan since the last full submission in 2018,
as well as certain additional information. Deutsche Bank’s next full U.S. Resolution Plan is due in 2024.


Risk and Capital Management

Capital management
Our Treasury function manages solvency, capital adequacy, leverage and bail-in capacity ratios at Group level and locally in
each region, as applicable. Treasury implements our capital strategy, which itself is developed by the Group Risk Committee
and approved by the Management Board. Treasury, directly or through the Group Asset and Liability Committee, manages,
among other things, issuance and repurchase of shares and capital instruments, hedging of capital ratios against foreign
exchange swings, setting capacities for key financial resources, the design of shareholders’ equity allocation, and regional
capital planning. We are fully committed to maintaining our sound capitalization both from an economic and regulatory
perspective. We continuously monitor and adjust our overall capital demand and supply in an effort to achieve an appropriate
balance of the economic and regulatory considerations at all times and from all perspectives. These perspectives include book
equity based on IFRS accounting standards, regulatory and economic capital as well as specific capital requirements from
rating agencies.

Treasury manages the issuance and repurchase of capital instruments, namely Common Equity Tier 1, Additional Tier 1 and
Tier 2 capital instruments as well as TLAC/MREL eligible debt instruments. Treasury constantly monitors the market for liability
management trades. Such trades represent a countercyclical opportunity to create Common Equity Tier 1 capital by buying
back our issuances below par.

Treasury manages the sensitivity of our CET 1 ratio and capital towards swings in foreign currency exchange rates against
the euro. For this purpose, Treasury proposes and the Management Board determines which currencies are to be hedged.
On this basis and within the constraints of a Management Board approved Risk Appetite for CET 1 ratio sensitivity and absolute
capital loss risk, Treasury develops and executes suitable hedging strategies. The capital invested into our foreign subsidiaries
and branches is either not hedged, partially hedged or fully hedged, balancing the effects from capital, capital deduction items
and risk weighted assets in foreign currency.



Resource limit setting
Usage of key financial resources is influenced through the following governance processes and incentives.

Target resource capacities are reviewed in our annual strategic plan in line with our CET 1 and Leverage Ratio ambitions. As
a part of our quarterly process, the Group Asset and Liability Committee approves divisional resource limits for total capital
demand (defined as the sum of Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) and certain RWA equivalents of Capital Deduction Items) and
leverage exposure that are based on the strategic plan but adjusted for market conditions and the short-term outlook. Limits
are enforced through a close monitoring process and an excess charging mechanism.




                                                                                                                              68
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                 Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Overall regulatory capital requirements are principally driven by either our CET 1 ratio (solvency) or leverage ratio (leverage)
requirements, whichever is the more binding constraint. For the internal capital allocation, the combined contribution of each
segment to the Group’s Common Equity Tier 1 ratio, the Group’s Leverage ratio and the Group’s Capital Loss under Stress
are weighted to reflect their relative importance and level of constraint to the Group. Contributions to the Common Equity
Tier 1 ratio and the Leverage ratio are measured through RWA and Leverage Ratio Exposure (LRE). The Group’s Capital
Loss under Stress is a measure of the Group’s overall economic risk exposure under a defined stress scenario. Goodwill,
other intangible assets and business related regulatory capital deduction items included in total capital demand are directly
allocated to the respective segments, supporting the calculation of the allocated tangible shareholders equity and the
respective rate of return.

Most of our subsidiaries and a number of our branches are subject to legal and regulatory capital requirements. In developing,
implementing and testing our capital and liquidity position, we fully take such legal and regulatory requirements into account.
Any material capital requests of our branches and subsidiaries across the globe are presented to and approved by the Group
Investment Committee prior to execution.

Further, Treasury is a member of our Pensions Committee and represented on the Investment Committee of the largest
Deutsche Bank pension fund which sets the investment guidelines for this fund. This representation is intended to ensure that
pension assets are aligned with pension liabilities, thus protecting our capital base.



Risk identification and assessment
We regularly identify risks to our business’ and infrastructure’s operations, including under stressed conditions. This
assessment incorporates input from both 1 st LoD and 2nd LoD, with the identified risks assessed for materiality based on their
severity and likelihood of materialization. The assessment of risks is complemented by a view on emerging risks applying a
forward-looking perspective. This risk identification and assessment process results in our risk inventory which captures the
material risks for the Group, and where relevant, across businesses, entities and branches.

Regular updates to the risk inventory are reported to senior management for review and challenge, and subsequently inform
key risk management processes. These include the development of stress scenarios tailored to Deutsche Bank’s risk profile,
and informing risk appetite setting and monitoring. Risks in the inventory are also mapped to risks in the risk type taxonomy.



Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality
Credit Risk framework
Credit Risk arises from all transactions where actual, contingent or potential claims against any counterparty, borrower, obligor
or issuer (which we refer to collectively as “counterparties”) exist, including those claims that we plan to distribute. These
transactions are typically part of our non-trading lending activities (such as loans and contingent liabilities) as well as our direct
trading activity with clients (such as OTC derivatives). These also include traded bonds and debt securities. Carrying values
of equity investments are also disclosed in our Credit Risk section. We manage the respective positions within our market risk
and credit risk frameworks.

Based on the Risk Type Taxonomy, Credit Risk is grouped into four material categories, namely default / migration risk,
transaction / settlement risk (exposure risk), mitigation risk and credit concentration risk. This is complemented by a regular
risk identification and materiality assessment.

– Default / migration risk as the main element of credit risk, is the risk that a counterparty defaults on its payment obligations
  or experiences material credit quality deterioration increasing the likelihood of a default.
– Transaction / settlement risk (exposure risk) is the risk that arises from any existing, contingent or potential future positive
  exposure.
– Mitigation risk is the risk of higher losses due to risk mitigation measures not performing as anticipated.
– Credit concentration risk is the risk of an adverse development in a specific single counterparty, country, industry or
  product / asset class leading to a disproportionate deterioration in the risk profile of Deutsche Bank’s credit exposures to
  that counterparty, country, industry or product / asset class.




                                                                                                                                   69
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




We manage our credit risk using the following philosophy and principles:

– Credit Risk Management(CRM) forms part of the 2nd Line of Defense (2nd LoD) within DB Group’s Three Lines of Defense
  model. Business as primary risk taker and owner forms the 1st Line of Defense (1st LoD) and Group Audit the 3rd Line of
  Defense (3rd LoD)
– Compliance is reporting to a different Management Board Member and hence the credit risk function is independent from
  the compliance function up to Management Board level.
– In each of our divisions, credit decision standards, processes and principles are consistently applied.
– A key principle of credit risk management is client credit due diligence. Our client selection is achieved in collaboration with
  our business division counterparts who stand as a first line of defense.
– We aim to prevent undue concentration and tail-risks (large unexpected losses) by maintaining a diversified credit portfolio.
  Client, industry, country and product-specific concentrations are assessed and managed against our risk appetite.
– We maintain underwriting standards aiming to avoid large undue credit risk on a counterparty and portfolio level. In this
  regard we extend unsecured cash positions and actively use hedging for risk mitigation purposes. Additionally, we strive
  to secure our derivative portfolio through collateral agreements and may additionally hedge concentration risks to further
  mitigate credit risks from underlying market movements.
– Every new credit facility and every extension (such as exposure limit increase) to any counterparty requires credit approval
  at the appropriate authority level in line with the minimum required credit authority calculation. We assign credit approval
  authorities to individuals according to their qualifications, experience and training, and we review these periodically.
– We manage all our credit exposures to each obligor across our consolidated Group on the basis of the “one obligor
  principle” (as required under CRR Article 4(1)(39)), under which all facilities to a group of borrowers which are linked to
  each other (for example by one entity holding a majority of the voting rights or capital of another) are consolidated under
  one group.
– We have established within CRM – where appropriate – specialized teams for deriving internal client ratings, analyzing and
  approving transactions, monitoring the portfolio or covering workout clients. For transaction approval purposes, structured
  credit risk management teams are aligned to the respective lending business areas.
– Where required, we have established processes to manage credit exposures at a legal entity level.
– To meet the requirements of CRR Article 190, DB Group has allocated the various control requirements for the credi t
  processes to 2nd LoD units that are best suited to perform such controls.


Measuring Credit Risk
Credit Risk is measured by credit rating, regulatory and internal capital demand and key credit metrics mentioned below.

The credit rating is an essential part of the Bank’s underwriting and credit process and builds the basis for risk appetite
determination on a counterparty and portfolio level, credit decision and transaction pricing as well the determination of
regulatory capital demand for credit risk. Each counterparty must be rated and each rating has to be reviewed at least
annually. Ongoing monitoring of counterparties helps keep ratings up-to-date. There must be no credit limit without a credit
rating. For each credit rating the appropriate rating approach has to be applied and the derived credit rating has to be
established in the relevant systems. Different rating approaches have been established to best reflect the specific
characteristics of exposure classes, including central governments and central banks, institutions, corporates and retail.

Counterparties in our non-homogenous portfolios are rated by our independent Credit Risk Management function. Country
risk related ratings are provided by ERM Risk Research.

Our rating analysis is based on a combination of qualitative and quantitative factors. When rating a counterparty we apply in-
house assessment methodologies, scorecards and our 21-grade rating scale for evaluating the credit-worthiness of our
counterparties.

Changes to existing credit models and introduction of new models are approved by the Regulatory Credit Risk Model
Committee (RCRMC) chaired by the Head of CRM before the models are used for credit decisions and capital calculation for
the first time or before they are significantly changed. Separately, for all material and partially for new models an approval by
the Head of Model Risk Management is required. Where appropriate, less significant changes can be approved by a delegate
of either function under a delegated authority. Proposals with high impact are recommended for approval to the Group Risk
Committee. Regulatory approval may also be required. The model validation is performed independently of model
development by Model Risk Management. The results of the regular validation processes as stipulated by internal policies are
brought to the attention of the Regulatory Credit Risk Model Forum (RCRMF) and the RCRMC, even if the validation results
do not lead to a change.

We measure risk-weighted assets to determine the regulatory capital demand for credit risk using “advanced”, “foundation”
and “standard” approaches of which advanced and foundation are approved by our regulator.




                                                                                                                               70
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




The advanced Internal Ratings Based Approach (IRBA) is the most sophisticated approach available under the regulatory
framework for credit risk and allows us to make use of our internal credit rating methodologies as well as internal estimates of
specific further risk parameters. These methods and parameters represent long-used key components of the internal risk
measurement and management process supporting the credit approval process, the economic capital and expected loss
calculation and the internal monitoring and reporting of credit risk. The relevant parameters include the probability of default
(PD), the loss given default (LGD) and the maturity (M) driving the regulatory risk-weight and the credit conversion factor
(CCF) as part of the regulatory exposure at default (EAD) estimation. For the majority of derivative counterparty exposures as
well as securities financing transactions (SFT), we make use of the internal model method (IMM) in accordance with CRR and
SolvV to calculate EAD. For most of our internal rating systems more than seven years of historical information is available to
assess these parameters. Our internal rating methodologies aim at point-in-time rather than a through-the-cycle rating, but in
line with regulatory solvency requirements, they are calibrated based on long-term averages of observed default rates.

The foundation IRBA is an approach available under the regulatory framework for credit risk allowing institutions to make use
of their internal rating methodologies while using pre-defined regulatory values for all other risk parameters. Parameters
subject to internal estimates include the PD while the LGD and the CCF are defined in the regulatory framework. Foundation
IRBA remains in place for some exposures stemming from ex-Postbank.

We apply the standardized approach to a subset of our credit risk exposures. The standardized approach measures credit
risk either pursuant to fixed risk weights, which are predefined by the regulator, or through the application of external ratings.
We assign certain credit exposures permanently to the standardized approach in accordance with Article 150 CRR. These
are predominantly exposures to the Federal Republic of Germany and other German public sector entities as well as
exposures to central governments of other European Member States that meet the required conditions. These exposures
make up the majority of the exposures carried in the standardized approach and receive predominantly a risk weight of zero
percent. For internal purposes, however, these exposures are subject to an internal credit assessment and fully integrated in
the risk management and economic capital processes.

In addition to the above described regulatory capital demand, we determine the internal capital demand for credit risk via an
economic capital model.

We calculate economic capital for the default risk, country risk and settlement risk as elements of credit risk. In line with our
economic capital framework, economic capital for credit risk is set at a level to absorb with a probability of 99.9 % very severe
aggregate unexpected losses within one year. Our economic capital for credit risk is derived from the loss distribution of a
portfolio via Monte Carlo Simulation of correlated rating migrations. The loss distribution is modeled in two steps. First,
individual credit exposures are specified based on parameters for the probability of default, exposure at default and loss given
default. In a second step, the probability of joint defaults is modeled through the introduction of economic factors, which
correspond to geographic regions and industries. The simulation of portfolio losses is then performed by an internally
developed model, which takes rating migration and maturity effects into account. Effects due to wrong-way derivatives risk
(i.e., the credit exposure of a derivative in the default case is higher than in non-default scenarios) are modeled by applying
our own alpha factor when deriving the exposure at default for derivatives and securities financing transactions under the
CRR. We allocate expected losses and economic capital derived from loss distributions down to transaction level to enable
management on transaction, customer and business level.

Besides the credit rating, which is a key component we apply for managing our credit portfolio, including transaction approval
and the setting of risk appetite, we establish credit limits for all credit exposures. Credit limits set forth maximum credit
exposures we are willing to assume over specified periods. In determining the credit limit for a counterparty, we consider the
counterparty’s credit quality by reference to our internal credit rating. Credit limits and credit exposures are both measured on
a gross and net basis where net is derived by deducting hedges and certain collateral from respective gross figures. For
derivatives, we look at current market values and the potential future exposure over the relevant time horizon which is based
upon our legal agreements with the counterparty. We also take into consideration the risk-return characteristics of individual
transactions and portfolios. Risk-Return metrics explain the development of client revenues as well as capital consumption.


IFRS 9 Impairment
Description of IFRS 9 Model and Methodology
In the following section, the Group provides an overview of the IFRS 9 impairment framework which includes descriptions of
key decisions taken in relation to critical accounting estimates and judgements, along with methodologies and definitions
applied in the IFRS 9 impairment model.

The impairment requirements of IFRS 9 apply to all credit exposures that are measured at amortized cost or fair value through
other comprehensive income and to off balance sheet lending commitments, such as loan commitments and financial
guarantees. For purposes of our impairment approach, we refer to these instruments as financial assets.



                                                                                                                               71
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                 Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




The Group determines its allowance for credit losses in accordance with IFRS 9 as follows:

–     Stage 1 reflects financial assets where it is assumed that credit risk has not increased significantly after initial recognition.

–     Stage 2 contains all financial assets, that are not defaulted, but have experienced a significant increase in credit risk
      since initial recognition.

–     Stage 3 consists of financial assets of clients which are defaulted in accordance with DB’s policies on regulatory default,
      which are based on the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) under Art. 178. The Group defines these financial
      assets as impaired, non-performing and defaulted.

–     Significant increase in credit risk is determined using quantitative and qualitative information based on the Group’s
      historical experience, credit risk assessment and forward-looking information.

–     Purchased or Originated Credit Impaired (POCI) financial assets are assets where at the time of initial recognition there
      is objective evidence of impairment.

The IFRS 9 impairment approach is an integral part of the Group’s Credit Risk Management procedures. The estimation of
Expected Credit Losses (ECL’s) is either performed via the automated, parameter based ECL calculation using the Group’s
ECL model or determined by Credit Officers. In both cases, the calculation takes place for each financial asset individually.
Similarly, the determination of the need to transfer between stages is made on an individual asset basis. The Group’s ECL
model is used to calculate the allowance for credit losses for all financial assets in Stage 1 and Stage 2, as well as for Stage 3
in the homogeneous portfolio (i.e. retail and small business loans with similar credit risk characteristics). For financial assets
in our non-homogeneous portfolio in Stage 3 and for POCI assets, the allowance for credit losses is determined by Credit
Officers.

The Group uses three main components to measure ECL. These are Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default (LGD)
and Exposure at Default (EAD). The Group leverages existing parameters used for determination of capital demand under the
Basel Internal Ratings Based Approach and internal risk management practices as much as possible to calculate ECL. These
parameters are adjusted where necessary to comply with IFRS 9 requirements (e.g. use of point in time ratings and removal
of downturn add-ons in the regulatory parameters). Incorporating forecasts of future economic conditions into the
measurement of expected credit losses influences the allowance for credit losses in Stage 1 and 2. In order to calculate lifetime
expected credit losses, the Group’s calculation derives the corresponding lifetime PDs from migration matrices that reflect
economic forecasts.

Stage Determination and Significant Increase in Credit Risk
At initial recognition, financial assets are reflected in Stage 1, unless the financial assets are POCI. If there is a significant
increase in credit risk, the financial asset is transferred to Stage 2. A significant increase in credit risk is determined by using
rating-related and process-related indicators. The assignment of financial assets to Stage 3 is based on the status of the
borrower being in default. If a borrower is in default, then all financial assets of the borrower are transferred to Stage 3.

Rating-related Stage 2 indicators: The Group compares a borrower’s lifetime PD at the reporting date with lifetime PD
expectations at the date of initial recognition to determine if there was a significant change in the borrower’s PDs and all of its
transactions in the scope of IFRS 9 impairment. Based on historically observed migration behavior and a sampling of different
economic scenarios, a lifetime PD distribution is obtained. A quantile of this distribution, which is defined for each counterparty
class, is chosen as the lifetime PD threshold. If the remaining lifetime PD of a transaction according to current expectatio ns
exceeds this threshold, the financial asset has incurred a significant increase in credit risk and is transferred to Stage 2. The
quantiles used to define Stage 2 thresholds are determined using expert judgment, are validated annually and have not
changed as a result of COVID-19. The thresholds applied vary depending on the original credit quality of the borrower, elapsed
lifetime, remaining lifetime and counterparty class. Management believes that the defined approach and quantiles represent
a meaningful indicator that a financial asset has incurred a significant increase in credit risk.

Process-related Stage 2 Indicators: Process-related indicators are derived via the use of existing risk management indicators,
which in Management’s view represent situations where the credit risk of financial assets has significantly increased. These
include borrowers being added to a credit watchlist, being transferred to workout status, payments being 30 days or more past
due or in forbearance (except for certain COVID-19 related forbearance measures as described further below).

As long as the conditions for one or more of the process-related or rating-related indicators is fulfilled and the borrower of the
financial asset has not met the definition of default, the asset will remain in Stage 2. If the Stage 2 indicators are no lon ger
fulfilled and the financial asset is not defaulted, the financial asset transfers back to Stage 1. In case of performing forborne
financial assets, the probation period in line with regulatory guidance amounts to 2 years before the financial asset is
reclassified to Stage 1.




                                                                                                                                    72
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




In the second quarter of 2021, the Group refined one of the process-related Stage 2 triggers. Financial assets added to the
watchlist for discretionary reasons are now transferred to Stage 2, whereas prior to this change only assets added to the
watchlist for mandatory reasons were transferred to Stage 2. This methodology change, which represents a change in
estimate, resulted in an increase of the Group’s allowance for credit losses of € 60 million, which is reflected in the Group ’s
financial results as of December 31, 2021.

If the borrower defaults, all transactions of the borrower are allocated to Stage 3. If at a later date the borrower is no longer in
default, the curing criteria according to regulatory guidance is applied (including probation periods), which are at least 3 months
or 1 year in case of distressed restructurings. Once the regulatory cure period or criteria has been met, the borrower will cease
to be classified as defaulted and its assets will be transferred back to Stage 2 or Stage 1.

In the third quarter of 2021, the Group obtained ECB approval and completed the rollout of the latest regulatory guidance on
the definition of default, which consists of two EBA guidelines. One guideline comprises an EBA technical standard regarding
the materiality threshold for credit obligations past due (implemented with ECB regulation (EU) 2018/1845) and the second
guideline covers the application of the definition of default. Both new requirements are jointly referred to as EBA Guidelines
on definition of default. These EBA Guidelines replaced the definition of default under Basel II and mainly impacted ECL for
specific portfolios within the Private Bank. The impact of the change in estimate was not material.

The expected credit loss calculation for Stage 3 distinguishes between transactions in homogeneous and non-homogenous
portfolios, and POCI financial assets. For transactions that are in Stage 3 and in a homogeneous portfolio, the Group uses a
parameter based automated approach to determine the credit loss allowance per transaction. For these transactions, the LGD
parameters are partially modelled to be time dependent, i.e. consider the declining recovery expectation as time elapses after
default. The allowance for credit losses for financial assets in our non-homogeneous portfolios in Stage 3, as well as for POCI
assets are determined by Credit Officers. This allows Credit Officers to consider currently available information and recovery
expectations specific to the borrowers and the financial assets at the reporting date.

The Group has not changed its existing stage trigger mechanics and rules due to the COVID-19 pandemic except for EBA
compliant moratoria and concessions granted to clients primarily affected by COVID-19. This exceptional treatment has
become less relevant in 2021 as it applied to a limited number of client relationships in Italy, Germany and Spain, as most of
the moratoria granted in Germany expired by end of 2020 and in other countries by the end of 2021.

Estimation Techniques for Key Input Factors
The first key input factor in the Group ECL calculation is the one-year PD for borrowers which is derived from our internal
rating systems. The Group assigns a PD to each borrower credit exposure based on a 21-grade master rating scale for all of
our exposure.

The borrower ratings assigned are derived based on internally developed rating models which specify consistent and distinct
customer-relevant criteria and assign a rating grade based on a specific set of criteria as given for a certain customer. The set
of criteria is generated from information sets relevant for the respective customer segments including general customer
behavior, financial and external data. The methods in use range from statistical scoring models to expert-based models taking
into account the relevant available quantitative and qualitative information. Expert-based models are usually applied for
borrowers in the exposure classes “Central governments and central banks”, “Institutions” and “Corporates” with the exception
of those “Corporates” segments for which a sufficient data basis is available for statistical scoring models. For the latter as
well as for the retail segment statistical scoring or hybrid models combining both approaches are commonly used. Quantitative
rating methodologies are developed based on applicable statistical modelling techniques, such as logistic regression.

One-year PDs are extended to multi-year PD curves using through-the-cycle (TTC) matrices and macroeconomic forecasts.
Based on economic scenarios centered around the macroeconomic baseline forecast, TTC matrices are first transformed into
point-in-time (PIT) rating migration matrices, typically for a two-year period. The calculation of the PIT matrices leverages a
link between macroeconomic variables and the default and rating behavior of borrowers, which is derived from historical
macroeconomic variables (MEV) and rating time series through regression techniques. In a final step, multi-year PD curves
are derived from PIT rating migration matrices for periods where reasonable and supportable forecasts are available and
extrapolated based on TTC rating migration matrices beyond those periods.

The second key input into the ECL calculation is the LGD parameter, which is defined as the likely loss intensity in case of a
borrower’s default. It provides an estimation of the exposure that cannot be recovered in a default event and therefore captures
the severity of a loss. Conceptually, LGD estimates are independent of a borrower’s probability of default. The LGD models
applied in stages 1 and 2, which are based on regulatory LGD models but adjusted for IFRS 9 requirements (removal of
downturn-add-on and removal of indirect costs of workout), ensure that the main drivers for losses (i.e. different levels and
quality of collateralization and customer or product types or seniority of facility) are reflected as risk drivers in LGD estimates.
In our LGD models we assign collateral type specific LGD parameters to the collateralized exposure (collateral value after
application of haircuts). The LGD setting for defaulted homogeneous portfolios are partially dependent on time after default




                                                                                                                                 73
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




and are either calibrated based on the Group’s multi-decade loss and recovery experience using statistical methods or for
less significant portfolios certain LGD model input parameters (e.g. cure rates) are determined by expert judgement.

The third key input is the Exposure at Default (EAD) over the lifetime of a financial asset which is modelled taking into account
expected repayment profiles (e.g. linear amortization, annuities, bullet loan structures). Prepayment options are not modelled
for all portfolios as they are not deemed material. We apply specific Credit Conversion Factors (CCFs) in order to calculate
an EAD value. Conceptually, the EAD is defined as the expected amount of the credit exposure to a borrower at the time of
its default. In instances where a transaction involves an unused limit, a percentage share of this unused limit is added to the
outstanding amount in order to appropriately reflect the expected outstanding amount in case of a borrower’s default. This
reflects the assumption that for commitments, the utilization at the time of default might be higher than the current outstanding
balance. In case a transaction involves an additional contingent component (i.e., guarantees) a further percentage share is
applied as part of the CCF model in order to estimate the amount of guarantees drawn in case of default. The calibrations of
such parameters are based on internal historical data and are either based on empirical analysis or supported by expert
judgement and consider borrower and product type specifics. Where supervisory CCF values need to be applied for regulatory
purposes, internal estimates are used for IFRS 9.

Expected Lifetime
IFRS 9 requires the determination of lifetime expected credit losses for which the expected lifetime of a financial asset is a
key input factor. Lifetime expected credit losses represent default events over the expected life of a financial asset. The Group
measures expected credit losses considering the risk of default over the maximum contractual period (including any borrower’s
extension options) over which the Group is exposed to credit risk.

Retail overdrafts, credit card facilities and certain corporate revolving facilities typically include both a loan and an undrawn
commitment component. The expected lifetime of such on-demand facilities exceeds their contractual life as they are typically
cancelled only when the Group becomes aware of an increase in credit risk. The expected lifetime is estimated by taking into
consideration historical information and the Group’s Credit Risk Management actions such as credit limit reductions and facility
cancellation. Where such facilities are subject to an individual review by Credit Risk Management, the lifetime for calculating
expected credit losses is 12 months. For facilities not subject to individual review by Credit Risk Management, we apply a
lifetime for calculating expected credit losses of 24 months.

Interest Rate used in the IFRS 9 model
In the context of the ECL calculation, the Group applies in line with IFRS 9 an approximation of the effective interest rate (EIR),
which is usually the contractual interest rate (CIR). The CIR is deemed to be an appropriate approximation, as the interest
rate is consistently used in the ECL model, interest recognition and for discounting of the ECL and does not materially differ
from the EIR.

Consideration of Collateralization in IFRS 9 Expected Credit Loss Calculation
The ECL model projects the level of collateralization for each point in time in the life of a financial asset. At the reporting date,
the model uses the existing collateral distribution process applied in DB’s Economic Capital model. In this model, the liquidation
value of each eligible collateral is allocated to relevant financial assets to distinguish between collateralized and
uncollateralized parts of each financial asset. In the ECL calculation, the Group subsequently applies the aforementioned
LGDs for secured and unsecured exposures to derive the ECL for the secured and unsecured part of the exposure separately.

For personal collateral (e.g. guarantees), the ECL model assumes that the relative level of collateralization remains stable
over time. In the case of an amortizing loan, the outstanding exposure and collateral values decrease together over time. For
physical collateral (e.g. real estate property), the ECL shall assume that the absolute collateral value remains constant. In
case of an amortizing loan, the collateralized part of the exposure increases over time and the loan-to-value decreases
accordingly.

Certain financial guarantee contracts are integral to the financial assets guaranteed. In such cases, the financial guarantee is
considered as collateral for the financial asset and the benefit of the guarantee is used to mitigate the ECL of the guaranteed
financial asset.

Forward Looking Information
Under IFRS 9, the allowance for credit losses is based on reasonable and supportable forward-looking information available
without undue cost or effort, which takes into consideration past events, current conditions and forecasts of future economic
conditions.




                                                                                                                                  74
Deutsche Bank                                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




To incorporate forward looking information into the Group’s allowance for credit losses, we use two key elements:

– As its base scenario, the Group uses external survey-based macroeconomic forecasts (e.g. consensus views on GDP and
  unemployment rates). In addition, our scenario expansion model, which has been initially developed for stress testing, is
  used for forecasting macroeconomic variables that are not covered by external consensus data. All forecasts are assumed
  to reflect the most likely development of the respective variables and are updated at least once per quarter.
– Statistical techniques are then applied to transform the base scenario into a scenario analysis covering an infinite number
  of scenarios, defined by probability distributions of the macroeconomic variables. These scenarios specify deviations from
  the baseline forecasts. The scenario distribution is then used for deriving multi-year PD curves for different rating and
  counterparty classes, which are applied in the ECL calculation and in the identification of significant deterioration in credit
  quality of financial assets as described above in the rating-related stage 2 indicators.

The general use of forward-looking information, including macro-economic factors, as well as adjustments taking into account
extraordinary factors (e.g. COVID-19), are monitored by the Group's Risk and Finance Credit Loss Provision Forum. At a
minimum, the Group updates its forecasts for macro-economic factors on a quarterly basis and reviews aspects of potential
model imprecision (e.g. MEV parameters outside the historic range used for model calibration, if not already included in the
model) as part of an MEV monitoring framework to assess the necessity of corrective measures in the form of overlays.

The Group’s overlay methodology introduced in 2021 focusses on individual extreme MEV movements in the context of
specific methodological assumptions and limitations. A quantitative test procedure involves the calculation of ratios between
(a) scenario projections from the consensus forecast and (b) historical maximum MEV movements to identify single MEVs are
outside of historical ranges.

As described earlier, the Group’s approach to reflect macroeconomic variables in the calculation of the ECL estimate is to
incorporate forecasts for the next two years, using eight discrete quarterly observations. After the period of eight quarters, the
Group constructs forecasts based on macro-economic variables and their historic trends.

In the second quarter of 2021: Deutsche Bank implemented a refinement of its forward-looking information model which
introduced a more granular approach to its portfolio segmentation to better reflect the key risk drivers in material portfolios.
This change in estimate resulted in an increase of the Group’s allowance for credit losses of € 31 million firstly reflected in the
second quarter of 2021 results.

The table below contains the MEVs which incorporate forward-looking information in our ECL model as of December 31, 2021,
which includes the more granular approach implemented in second quarter 2021.

Forward-looking information applied
                                                                                                                                                  December 31, 2021¹ ²
                                                                                                                                             Year 1              Year 2
                                                                                                                                     (4 quarter avg)     (4 quarter avg)
Commodity - Gold                                                                                                                          1764.58             1696.51
Commodity - WTI                                                                                                                             73.19               68.21
Credit - CDX Emerging Markets                                                                                                              231.80              268.64
Credit - CDX High Yield                                                                                                                    353.42              399.62
Credit - CDX IG                                                                                                                             59.53               63.98
Credit - High Yield Index                                                                                                                     3.95                4.46
Credit - ITX Europe 125                                                                                                                     61.37               69.93
Equity - MSCI Asia                                                                                                                           1543                1514
Equity - Nikkei                                                                                                                             29673               30764
Equity - S&P500                                                                                                                              4777                5033
GDP - Developing Asia                                                                                                                      3.78 %              6.26 %
GDP - Emerging Markets                                                                                                                     3.72 %              5.38 %
GDP - Eurozone                                                                                                                             4.67 %              2.91 %
GDP - Germany                                                                                                                              3.35 %              2.86 %
GDP - Italy                                                                                                                                5.17 %              2.33 %
GDP - USA                                                                                                                                  4.46 %              2.79 %
Real Estate Prices - US CRE Index                                                                                                          348.86              377.26
Unemployment - Eurozone                                                                                                                    7.41 %              7.07 %
Unemployment - Germany                                                                                                                     3.13 %              2.83 %
Unemployment - Italy                                                                                                                       9.18 %              8.92 %
Unemployment - Japan                                                                                                                       2.73 %              2.53 %
Unemployment - Spain                                                                                                                      14.26 %             13.66 %
Unemployment - USA                                                                                                                         4.05 %              3.68 %
1
    MEV as of 31 December 2021; MEV outside the calibrated range were adjusted either in the model or via a management overlay as discussed further below.
2
    Year 1 equals fourth quarter of 2021 to third quarter of 2022, Year 2 equals fourth quarter of 2022 to third quarter of 2023




                                                                                                                                                                       75
Deutsche Bank                                                          Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                     Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




During the height of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, it was management’s opinion that the most representative approach for
estimating ECL was to reduce the weight of short-term forecasts and derive adjusted model inputs based on longer term
averages. For this reason, the Group applied an overlay to its standard IFRS 9 model in 2020. The overlay, which reduced
the provision by € 104 million as of December 31, 2020, was based on averaging forecasts for GDP and unemployment rates
over the next three years. This overlay was no longer applied as of January 2021 as the MEV had gained their relevance with
any remaining imprecisions being addressed via the model imprecision monitoring process discussed above.

                                                                                                                                                              December 31. 2020¹ ²
                                                                                                                                  Year 1                 Year 2                 Year 3
                                                                                                                          (4 quarter avg)        (4 quarter avg)        (4 quarter avg)
Credit - ITX Europe 125                                                                                                              52.81                  −                      −
FX - EUR/USD                                                                                                                           1.20                 −                      −
GDP Eurozone                                                                                                                        1.38 %             4.37 %                 2.32 %
GDP Germany                                                                                                                         1.54 %             4.01 %                 2.08 %
GDP Italy                                                                                                                           1.92 %             3.80 %                 1.93 %
GDP USA                                                                                                                             2.80 %             3.35 %                 2.29 %
Rate - US Treasury 2y                                                                                                               0.17 %                  –                      −
Unemployment - Eurozone                                                                                                             8.86 %             8.35 %                 7.94 %
Unemployment - Germany                                                                                                              4.30 %             3.95 %                 3.72 %
Unemployment - Italy                                                                                                               10.65 %            10.38 %                 9.85 %
Unemployment - Spain                                                                                                               17.89 %            16.32 %                15.49 %
Unemployment - USA                                                                                                                  6.40 %             5.19 %                 4.46 %
1
    Rates, FX and credit spreads as per December 7 release; GDP, unemployment forecasts updated per December 16.
2
    Year 1 equals fourth quarter of 2020 to third quarter of 2021, Year 2 equals fourth quarter of 2021 to third quarter of 2022


Management overlays
Management regularly reviews key inputs into the ECL calculation and discusses aspects of potential model imprecision to
assess the necessity of corrective measures in the form of overlays. In the following section, the Group provides details on its
management overlays recorded as of December 31, 2020 and developments until December 31, 2021

Development of overlays from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021
                                                                                                                   Overlays as                                            Overlays as
                                                                                                                                      Discontinued           New
                                                                                                                  of December                                            of December
                                                                                                                                          overlays        Overlays
in € m. (unless stated otherwise)                                                                                     31, 2020                                               31, 2021
Overlay description                                                                                 Impact on
3y averaging of specific MEVs                                       All financial assets in Stage 1 and 2                 (104)                104                  0                0
COVID-19 related downside risks                                     All financial assets in Stage 1 and 2                  130                (130)                 0                0
Construction Risk following increased prices for                    Mortgage portfolios in Private Bank
building materials                                                  in Stage 1 and 2                                          0                  0                 15              15
Model calibration (MEV outside calibrated range of the
                                                                    All financial assets in Stage 1 and 2
FLI model)                                                                                                                    0                  0                 56              56
Recalibrations required due to the new Definition of                Financial assets primarily in Private
Default                                                             Bank in Stage 3                                           0                  0             (57)                (57)
Total                                                                                                                        26                (26)             14                  14


The Group applied the following overlays to its IFRS 9 model output as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.

– FLI model overlay: As described above in the MEV section, the Group applied an overlay to its standard IFRS 9 model as
  a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a decrease of the Group’s allowance for credit losses. The overlay
  was based on averaging forecasts for GDP and unemployment rates over the next three years in its ECL estimation. The
  Group did not apply the above overlay post year end 2020 and returned to its standard IFRS 9 approach in 2021.
– COVID-19 uncertainties: As of December 31, 2020 the Group booked an additional overlay of € 130 million to address the
  remaining high uncertainty in the credit environment, which resulted in an increase of the Group’s allowance for credit
  losses. In particular as at 2020 year-end the COVID-19 pandemic related lock-down measures and associated economic
  support measures offered by central governments had further hampered the ability to assess the true state of borrowers’
  capacity to repay their financial obligations, also taking into account the emerging downsides expected in particular as
  moratoria are fading out (although partially extended, e.g. in Spain and Italy) and a second wave of lockdown measures
  started in December 2020. This overlay was released at the beginning of 2021 after the expected uncertainties had not
  materialized.
– Construction Risk following sharp increase of building material prices in 2021: the Group decided to record a € 15 million
  overlay, to address the risk of budget overruns and delays due to unavailable or significantly more expensive building
  materials, which resulted in an increase of the Group’s allowance for credit losses. This overlay was recorded against
  approved, but not yet fully paid out mortgage loans applied for constructing or remodeling properties in Germany.




                                                                                                                                                                                     76
Deutsche Bank                                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                 Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




– Model calibration: The Group applies a management overlay to address significant year-on-year movements in certain
  macroeconomic variables, in particular GDP, which were identified as being outside the calibrated range of the FLI model.
  Since the model was not calibrated to deal with such extreme year-on-year movements of certain MEV, it is management’s
  view that the model is underestimating the amount of expected credit losses required at the reporting date. The
  quantification of the overlay amount was supported by an ECL impact calculation with forecasts outside of the historical
  range replaced by maximum MEV moves observed during the time window considered for model calibration purposes. As
  of year-end 2021, this overlay was € 56 million and resulted in an increase of the Group’s allowance for credit losses.
– Recalibrations required due to the new Definition of Default introduced: In the third quarter of 2021, Deutsche Bank
  implemented the new Definition of Default which is the trigger for Stage 3 in Deutsche Bank’s IFRS 9 framework. The
  implementation of the new Definition of Default mainly affected the Private Bank, where the Stage 3 population in the
  homogeneous portfolios increased. As an adjustment in the Definition of Default is not expected to materially change the
  loss expectation related to this portfolio, Management is of the view that this change resulted in an overstatement of
  provisions in Stage 3 not reflecting the loss expectations for the impacted portfolios at the reporting date as the new
  Definition of Default will also require a recalibration of the Loss Given Default (LGD) parameter in the model that has not
  yet taken place. The LGD settings are reviewed on an annual basis with independent validation performed by the Model
  Risk Management function. The recalibration is only expected in 2022 once empirical data is available for a statistical
  recalibration, and consequently an overlay was recorded to address the expected LGD recalibration effects amounting to
  € 57 million, which resulted in a decrease of the Group’s allowance for credit losses.

Model Sensitivity

Macroeconomic Variables
The sensitivity of our model with respect to potential changes in projections for key MEVs is shown in the below table, which
provides ECL impacts for Stages 1 and 2 from downward and upward shifts applied separately to each group of MEVs. Each
of these groups consists of MEVs from the same category:

–   GDP growth rates: includes USA, Eurozone, Germany, Italy, Developing Asia, Emerging Markets
–   Unemployment rates: includes USA, Eurozone, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain
–   Equities: S&P500, Nikkei, MSCI Asia
–   Credit spreads: ITX Europe 125, High Yield Index, CDX IG, CDX High Yield, CDX Emerging Markets
–   Real Estate: Commercial Real Estate Price Index
–   Commodities: WTI oil price, Gold price

The tables below present the impact of upward and downward shifts to each of the MEV groups and impact on the ECL
provision as of December 31, 2021. Note the sensitivity analysis only includes the impact of the aggregated MEV group (i.e.
potential correlation between different MEV groups or the impact of management overlays is not taken into consideration).

As the Group refined its forward-looking information model in 2021 to include a more granular approach to its portfolio
segmentation, the prior year information is not directly comparable as 2020 is based on a less granular approach.

ECL for Stage 3 is not affected and not reflected in the following tables as its modelling is independent of the macroeconomic
scenarios

IFRS 9 – Sensitivities of Forward-Looking Information – Group Level
                                                                                                                                                        December 31, 2021
                                                                                                                  Upward sensitivity                Downward sensitivity
                                                                                                                         ECL impact                            ECL impact
                                                                                                   Upward shift              in € m.   Downward shift              in € m.
GDP growth rates                                                                                           1pp                (49.4)           (1)pp                 55.5
Unemployment rates                                                                                     (0.5)pp                (23.8)          0.5pp                  25.4
Real estate prices                                                                                         5%                  (3.9)          (5) %                   4.2
Equities                                                                                                  10 %                 (7.2)         (10) %                   9.4
Credit spreads                                                                                          (40) %                (20.9)           40 %                  23.5
Commodities¹                                                                                              10 %                (15.0)         (10) %                  16.2
¹ Here the sign of the shift applies to oil prices changes. Gold price changes have the opposite sign.
1pp (percentage point), e.g. GDP shifts from 3 % to 4 % // 1 % (percentage change), e.g. Real estate price shifts from 100 to 101.



                                                                                                                                                        December 31, 2020
                                                                                                                  Upward sensitivity                Downward sensitivity
                                                                                                                         ECL impact                            ECL impact
                                                                                                   Upward shift              in € m.   Downward shift              in € m.
GDP growth rates                                                                                           1pp                (93.5)           (1)pp                 99.1
Unemployment rates                                                                                     (0.5)pp                (49.9)           0.5pp                 56.4




                                                                                                                                                                        77
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                  Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




At Group level, ECL sensitivity is primarily driven by changes in GDP growth rates, unemployment and credit spreads.
Moderate sensitivities are also observed with respect to changes of commodities, equities and real estate prices. Compared
to 2020, the total sensitivity impact slightly decreased in 2021 due to the lower ECL provision.

At divisional level, the analysis was only performed for the period ended December 31, 2021 and revealed GDP growth rates,
credit spreads and commodities prices to be the dominant factors for the Investment Bank, whereas the model sensitivity for
the Corporate Bank and Private Bank is mainly associated with changes in GDP growth rates and unemployment rates. The
model sensitivity table for the Private Bank shows GDP growth rates and unemployment rates only, as the key MEVs relevant
to the underlying portfolios.

IFRS 9 – Sensitivities of Forward-Looking Information applied on Stage 1 and Stage 2 - Corporate Bank
                                                                                                                                                           December 31, 2021
                                                                                                                    Upward sensitivity                 Downward sensitivity
                                                                                                                          ECL impact                              ECL impact
                                                                                                   Upward shift               in € m.     Downward shift              in € m.
GDP growth rates                                                                                             1pp                (12.5)            (1)pp                 13.7
Unemployment rates                                                                                       (0.5)pp                 (8.9)           0.5pp                   9.6
Real estate prices                                                                                           5%                  (0.5)           (5) %                   0.5
Credit spreads                                                                                            (40) %                 (4.3)            40 %                   4.9
Commodities¹                                                                                                10 %                 (4.5)          (10) %                   5.0
¹ Here the sign of the shift applies to oil prices changes. Gold price changes have the opposite sign.


IFRS 9 – Sensitivities of Forward-Looking Information applied on Stage 1 and Stage 2 - Investment Bank
                                                                                                                                                            December 31, 2021
                                                                                                                     Upward sensitivity                    Downward sensitivity
                                                                                                                            ECL impact                             ECL impact
                                                                                                     Upward shift               in € m.    Downward shift              in € m.
GDP growth rates                                                                                              1pp                (24.5)             (1)pp                 27.7
Unemployment rates                                                                                        (0.5)pp                 (3.7)            0.5pp                   4.2
Real estate prices                                                                                            5%                  (3.4)            (5) %                   3.6
Equities                                                                                                     10 %                 (2.4)           (10) %                   3.1
Credit spreads                                                                                             (40) %                (14.4)             40 %                  15.8
Commodities¹                                                                                                 10 %                (10.1)           (10) %                  10.8
¹ Here the sign of the shift applies to oil prices changes. Gold price changes have the opposite sign.


IFRS 9 – Sensitivities of Forward-Looking Information applied on Stage 1 and Stage 2 - Private Bank
                                                                                                                                                            December 31, 2021
                                                                                                                     Upward sensitivity                    Downward sensitivity
                                                                                                                            ECL impact                             ECL impact
                                                                                                     Upward shift               in € m.    Downward shift              in € m.
GDP growth rates                                                                                              1pp                (10.0)            (1)pp                  10.7
Unemployment rates                                                                                        (0.5)pp                 (9.7)            0.5pp                   9.8


Impact of Lifetime Expected Credit Losses for Stage 1 borrowers
As described earlier, the Group uses a mixture of quantitative and qualitative criteria to determine Significant Increase in Credit
Risk which require, for affected borrowers, a move to lifetime ECL (Stage 2). If for all Stage 1 borrowers Deutsche Bank were
to record lifetime expected credit losses, the Group’s allowance for credit losses amounting to € 5.4 billion as of December
31, 2021 and as of December 31, 2020 would increase by approximately 44 % as of year-end 2021 and 41 % as of year-end
2020.

Stage 3 LGD setting
The Group’s allowance for credit losses in Stage 3 for the homogeneous portfolios amounts to € 2.2 billion as of December
31, 2021 and € 1.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. The key driver in determining the ECL provision is the Loss Given Default
estimate, which differs by individual portfolios. Loss Given Default is influenced by recovery rates, proceeds from the sale of
collateral, as well as cure rates. Some of the drivers for different portfolios include elements of expert judgment. If the LGD for
all homogeneous portfolios were to increase by 1 %, then Stage 3 ECL would increase by approximately € 20 million as of
December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                             78
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




IFRS 9 Model results

Based on the above described IFRS 9 model and overlays applied, the Group reported a provision for credit losses of
€ 515 million for the year ended 2021, which is a significant reduction to € 1.8 billion for the year ended 2020. This provision
for credit losses in 2021 and the significant reduction versus the year ended 2020 was driven by a benign credit environment,
strong recovery of main economies after easing of COVID-19 related restrictions and a positive outlook based on improved
macro-economic parameters.

As discussed above, the Group has applied various management overlays both in 2021 and 2020 to address the downside
risks related to COVID-19, but also to address potential model imprecisions driven by a high volatility in MEV’s.

In regards to the Business Divisions, the Corporate Bank recorded a release of provision for credit losses of € 3 million in 2021
compared to provision for credit losses of € 364 million in 2020. The year-over-year reduction was driven by low impairments
(Stage 3) and releases in Stage 1 and 2. The Investment Bank recorded an increase of provisions for credit losses of € 104
million compared to provision for credit losses of € 690 million in 2020. The year-over-year reduction was driven by significantly
lower level of COVID-19 related impairments (Stage 3) in 2021. The Private Bank recorded a provision for credit losses of €
446 million in 2021 compared to € 711 million in 2020, benefiting from an overall benign macroeconomic environment.

The Group has assessed credit risks and its concentrations related to climate-related risks and how those risks affect the
amounts recognized in the Allowance for Credit Losses which are deemed to be immaterial at the end of December 31, 2021.

For details on the Group’s accounting policy related to IFRS 9 Impairment, please refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting
Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates of the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Focus Industries in light of COVID-19 Pandemic

The recovery of the global economy has accelerated along with progress of COVID-19-vaccination in 2021 in key economies,
which is expected to continue supporting corporate earnings. However, there continues to be a significant dispersion in the
recovery between sectors with certain industries seeing more persistent impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and the surge
of infections due to the global spread of the Omicron variant.

As oil and gas prices have increased above pre-COVID-19 levels in the 2nd half of 2021, this sector is no longer considered a
focus industry.

Key focus sectors accounted for approximately 8 % of the loan book and approximately 27 % of Stage 3 credit loss provisions
of the Group as of the year ended 2021. The information below is based on an internal risk view that is not fully congruent
with the NACE (Nomenclature des Activities Economiques dans la Communate Europeenne, which is the statistical
classification of economic activities in the European Union) applied elsewhere in this report, e.g. in the Asset Quality section.

– Commercial real estate (CRE) (€ 31 billion loan exposure as of December 31, 2021 and € 27 billion as of December 31,
  2020): CRE exposure accounts for 7 % of the loan book and comprises CRE Group (€ 19 billion), APAC CRE exposures
  in the Investment Bank (€ 6 billion) and non-recourse CRE business in the Corporate Bank (€ 6 billion). The year-over-year
  increase was driven by increased lending activity due to gradual recovery of CRE markets as well as the FX impact of a
  stronger US Dollar. The risk profile of the portfolio improved moderately in 2021 as global economies and CRE markets
  continued their recovery and the US hospitality sector benefitted from a strong leisure travel. The pace of new loan
  modifications continued to decline. Moderate loan-to-value ratios (LTVs) averaging approximately 59 % provide a
  substantial buffer to absorb declines in collateral values.
– Retail (excluding food/staples) (€ 4 billion loan exposure as of December 31, 2021 and € 4 billion as of December 31,
  2020): The sector is benefitting from the re-opening after a prolonged period of COVID-related restrictions. However, some
  segments are suffering from supply shortages and the pandemic has added to the structural challenges the sector is facing
  from digitalization. Portfolio risks are mitigated by a focus on strong global brands with approximately two third of net credit
  limits relating to investment grade rated clients.
Aviation (€ 3 billion loan exposure as of December 31, 2021 and € 3 billion as of December 31, 2020): Whilst first signs of a
  sector recovery have been seen, traffic volumes remained materially below 2019 levels. A return to pre-COVID-19
  passenger volumes is not expected for several years. The portfolio benefits from a significant share of secured aircraft
  financing which is biased towards newer/ liquid aircraft. The unsecured portfolio is focused on developed market flag
  carriers, many of which benefit from robust government support packages.
– Leisure (€ 2 billion loan exposure as of December 31, 2021 and € 2 billion as of December 31, 2020): The industry has
  been hit by a very sharp decline in both business and private travel during lockdowns. Volumes are unlikely to recover to
  pre-crisis levels in the near-term. Our portfolio is biased towards industry leaders in the hotels and casinos segment, mostly
  domiciled in the U.S. market.




                                                                                                                               79
Deutsche Bank                                                        Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                   Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




IFRS 9 - Application of EBA guidance regarding Default, Forbearance and IFRS 9
in light of COVID-19 measures
EBA’s “Statement on the application of the prudential framework regarding Default, Forbearance and IFRS 9 in light of
COVID-19 measures” published on March 25, 2020 states that institutions are expected to use a degree of judgement and
distinguish between borrowers whose credit standing would not be significantly affected by the current situation in the long
term, and those who would be unlikely to restore their creditworthiness. The Bank performed portfolio reviews and applied this
regulatory guidance to a number of clients mainly in the Investment Bank and Corporate Bank.

EBA is further of the view that the public and private moratoria, as a response to COVID-19 pandemic, do not have to be
automatically classified as forbearance if the moratoria are not borrower specific, based on the applicable national law or on
an industry or sector-wide private initiative agreed and applied broadly by relevant credit institutions. Deutsche Bank has
introduced this guidance into its internal risk management processes.


Legislative and non-legislative moratoria and public guarantee schemes in light of
COVID-19 pandemic
In 2020, the European Banking Association (EBA) issued a “Statement on the application of the prudential framework
regarding Default, Forbearance and IFRS 9 in light of COVID-19 measures”, along with guidance on legislative and non-
legislative moratoria.

The following table provides an overview of active and expired loans and advances subject to EBA-compliant moratoria, loans
and advances subject to COVID-19 related forbearance measures and newly originated loans and advances subject to a
public guarantee scheme in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.

Overview of active and expired moratoria, forbearance measures and guarantee schemes in light of COVID-19 pandemic
                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021                                                  Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                Newly originated                                              Newly originated
                                                                                 Loans and            loans and                           Other loans and           loans and
                                                                                  advances            advances                                  advances            advances
                                                            Loans and             subject to    subject to public         Loans and             subject to    subject to public
                                                             advances           COVID-19-             guarantee            advances           COVID-19-             guarantee
                                                       subject to EBA-              related      schemes in the      subject to EBA-               related     schemes in the
                                                             compliant         forbearance        context of the           compliant         forbearance        context of the
in € m.                                                      moratoria            measures      COVID-19 crisis1           moratoria            measures      COVID-19 crisis
Corporate Bank                                                    519                2,466                2,322                 610                2,956                2,362
Investment Bank                                                   108                3,501                   60                 107                4,353                   60
Private Bank                                                    6,357                  928                1,570               7,499                1,114                1,124
Capital Release Unit                                              384                    2                    0                 433                    0                    0
Total                                                           7,368                6,897                3,952               8,649                8,424                3,546
1
    Excluding € 0.3 billion as of December 31, 2021 and € 0.3 billion as of December 31, 2020 which qualify for derecognition as these loans meet the pass-through criteria for
    financial instruments under IFRS 9.


Breakdown of COVID-19 related measures by stages
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
                                                              Legislative and non-legislative           COVID-19 related forbearance
                                                                                   Moratoria                               measures                   Public guarantee schemes
                                                         Gross Carrying      Expected Credit       Gross Carrying     Expected Credit       Gross Carrying      Expected Credit
in € m.                                                        Amount                Losses              Amount               Losses              Amount                Losses
Stage 1                                                          5,381                  (10)               3,330                   (6)               3,079                   (2)
Stage 2                                                          1,288                  (30)               2,602                  (31)                 770                   (9)
Stage 3                                                            698                 (162)                 965                 (122)                 103                  (14)
Total                                                            7,368                 (202)               6,897                 (158)               3,952                  (25)



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                              Legislative and non-legislative           COVID-19 related forbearance
                                                                                   Moratoria                               measures                   Public guarantee schemes
                                                         Gross Carrying      Expected Credit       Gross Carrying     Expected Credit       Gross Carrying      Expected Credit
in € m.                                                        Amount                Losses              Amount               Losses              Amount                Losses
Stage 1                                                          6,464                  (23)               5,746                  (18)               3,135                   (3)
Stage 2                                                          1,872                  (63)               1,994                  (54)                 360                   (4)
Stage 3                                                            313                  (69)                 684                  (80)                  51                   (4)
Total                                                            8,649                 (155)               8,424                 (152)               3,546                  (11)




                                                                                                                                                                              80
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                  Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




COVID-19 related forbearance measures: As of December 31, 2021, COVID-19 forbearance measures have been granted to
€ 6.9 billion outstanding loans and advances; reflecting a broad range of relief from modifications of contract conditions
including covenants in the respective loan contract, extension of grace periods to payment deferrals. As of December 31,
2021, over 84 % of clients are still performing and the Bank continues to remain at a stable ECL level. Over half of the
forbearance measures consisted of contract modifications unrelated to payment deferrals. All forborne loans and advances
are required to be classified as forborne until a 24-months’ probation period has been reached.

EBA-compliant moratoria can be divided into legislative moratoria, which are instituted by the Government and non-legislative
moratoria granted by a group of financial institutions. EBA-compliant moratoria: The moratorium for SMEs and Corporates in
Italy was originally scheduled to end on September 30, 2020, but has been further extended until December 2021. Also, the
Spanish government extended the legislative Spanish moratoria for SMEs and Corporates until the end of 2021. Non-
legislative moratoria: The non-legislative moratoria launched in Italy to support consumer finance clients from January 2021
until the end of March 2021 have all expired.

During 2021, the number of clients and volumes under moratoria have significantly reduced due to repayments, from peak
levels in the second quarter 2020. As of December 31, 2021, nearly all moratoria have expired, those that are still active are
well below € 30 million. More than 95 % of these clients who took advantage of moratoria have now resumed payments. The
transition was actively managed whereby we contacted each private client in order to ensure the clients were aware and able
to resume payments before leaving moratoria.

Newly originated loans and advances subject to a public guarantee scheme: The Group has originated approximately
€ 4.2 billion of loans under the public guarantee scheme as of December 31, 2021 and in most cases the terms of the new
originated loans and advances are between two and five years. Approximately € 2.1 billion of loans were granted in Germany
via programs sponsored by KfW, of which, € 0.3 billion were derecognized as the terms of the loan and guarantee met the
criteria for derecognition under IFRS 9, and € 1.6 billion were originated in Spain and € 0.5 billion in Luxembourg. As of
December 31, 2021, 99,4 % of the loans that were granted public guarantees continue to make regular repayments.


Asset Quality
The Asset Quality section under IFRS 9 describes the quality of debt instruments subject to impairment, which under IFRS 9
consist of debt instruments measured at amortized cost, financial instruments at fair value through other comprehensive
income (FVOCI) as well as off balance sheet lending commitments such as loan commitments and financial guarantees
(hereafter collectively referred to as “Financial Assets”).

Overview of financial assets subject to impairment

The following tables provide an overview of the exposure amount and allowance for credit losses by financial asset class
broken down into stages as per IFRS 9 requirements.

Overview of financial assets subject to impairment
                                                                                          Dec 31, 2021                                                           Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                Stage 3                                                                Stage 3
in € m.                               Stage 1       Stage 2       Stage 3         POCI           Total      Stage 1       Stage 2        Stage 3         POCI           Total
Amortized cost¹
Gross carrying amount               710,271        40,653         11,326         1,297       763,548       651,941        35,372        10,655          1,729       699,697
Allowance for credit
losses²                                  440           532         3,740           182          4,895           544           648         3,614           139          4,946
of which Loans
   Gross carrying amount            425,342        38,809         10,653         1,272       476,077       385,422        34,537        10,138          1,710       431,807
   Allowance for credit
   losses²                               421           530         3,627           177          4,754           522           647         3,506           133          4,808

Fair value through OCI
Fair value                           28,609            326             44             0       28,979        55,566            163           105              0       55,834
Allowance for credit losses              15             10             16             0           41            12              6             2              0           20

Off-balance sheet
Notional amount                     268,857        14,498          2,582             11      285,948       251,545          8,723         2,587              1      262,856
Allowance for credit
losses³                                  108           111           225              0           443           144            74           200              0           419
1
    Financial Assets at Amortized Cost consist of: Loans at Amortized Cost, Cash and central bank balances, Interbank balances (w/o central banks), Central bank funds sold and
    securities purchased under resale agreements, Securities borrowed and certain subcategories of Other assets.
2
    Allowance for credit losses do not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 4 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 5 million as of December 31, 2020.
3
    Allowance for credit losses do not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 6 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 4 million as of December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                           81
Deutsche Bank                                          Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                     Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Financial assets at amortized cost

The following tables provide an overview of development of financial assets at amortized cost and related allowance for credit
losses in each of the relevant reporting periods broken down into stages as per IFRS 9 requirements.

Development of exposures in the current reporting period
                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                      Gross carrying amount
in €                                                                Stage 1            Stage 2    Stage 3   Stage 3 POCI              Total
Balance, beginning of year                                         651,941             35,372     10,655          1,729           699,697
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                   78,565              7,507        305           (102)           86,277
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                          (155)            (1,109)     1,264              0                 0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                            (1)                (0)      (16)             0                (17)
Changes in models
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period                                                             (34,157)            (1,891)    (1,271)          (372)          (37,691)
Recovery of written off amounts                                          0                  0         55             23                78
Foreign exchange and other changes                                  14,078                774        333             19            15,204
Balance, end of reporting period                                   710,271             40,653     11,326          1,297           763,548



Financial assets at amortized cost subject to impairment increased by € 64 billion or 9 % in 2021, which was largely driven by
Stage 1:

Stage 1 exposures increased by € 58 billion or 9 % primarily due to the increase in loans at amortized cost in Investment Bank
and Private Bank as well as the increase in central bank balances.

Stage 2 exposures increased by € 5 billion or 15 % largely driven by the Investment Bank due to enhancements in the process
related Stage 2 triggers, discussed above in the IFRS 9 impairment section.

Stage 3 exposures slightly increased by € 240 million or 2 % in 2021, which was driven by the increase in the Private Bank
due to the new EBA definition of default as well as new defaults in the Investment Bank. This was partly offset by the reductions
in our POCI loan portfolio as well as Corporate Bank and Capital Release Unit.

Development of exposures in the previous reporting period
                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                      Gross carrying amount
in €                                                                Stage 1            Stage 2    Stage 3   Stage 3 POCI              Total
Balance, beginning of year                                         645,967             24,680      7,531          2,150           680,328
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                   79,588              8,215      3,304           (166)           90,940
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                        (7,462)             5,543      1,919              0                 0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                             0                 (3)      (31)             0                (34)
Changes in models                                                         0                  0         0              0                  0
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period                                                             (48,990)            (2,268)    (1,910)          (263)          (53,430)
Recovery of written off amounts                                          0                  0         58              0                58
Foreign exchange and other changes                                 (17,162)              (795)      (216)             7           (18,165)
Balance, end of reporting period                                   651,941             35,372     10,655          1,729           699,697


Financial assets at amortized cost subject to impairment increased by € 19 billion or 3 % in 2020, which was primarily driven
by stage 2:

Stage 1 exposures slightly increased by € 6 billion or 1 %.

Stage 2 exposures increased by € 11 billion or 43 % driven by loans at amortized cost in Private Bank and Corporate Bank
due to the update of the macroeconomic outlook.

Stage 3 exposures increased by € 2,703 million or 28 % in 2020 driven by new defaults across business divisions, partly offset
by a reduction in the POCI loan portfolio.




                                                                                                                                         82
Deutsche Bank                                                          Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                     Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Development of allowance for credit losses in the current reporting period
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                       Allowance for Credit Losses³
in €                                                                                   Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI⁴                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                                 544                  648                3,614                   139                4,946
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                                         (245)                  85                  615                   26                   480
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                               138                 (197)                  58                  N/M                     0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                                             N/M                   N/M                  N/M                  N/M                   N/M
Changes in models                                                                           0                     0                    0                    0                     0
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period²                                                                                      0                    0                 (561)                   (5)                (566)
Recovery of written off amounts                                                              0                    0                   55                    23                   78
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                           3                   (4)                 (41)                   (0)                 (43)
Balance, end of reporting period                                                           440                  532                3,740                   182                4,895
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk¹                                       (107)                (112)                 673                    26                  480
1
    Movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in creditworthiness and changes in models add up to Provision for Credit Losses excluding
    country risk.
2
    This position includes charge offs of allowance for credit losses.
3
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 4 million as of December 31, 2021.
4
    The total amount of undiscounted expected credit losses at initial recognition on financial assets that are purchased or originated credit-impaired initially recognized during the
    reporting period was € 0 million in 2021 and € 50 million in 2020.


Allowance for credit losses against financial assets at amortized cost subject to impairment slightly decreased by € 51 million
or 1 % in 2021 mainly driven by Stages 1 and 2:

Stage 1 allowances decreased by € 104 million or 19 % due to the update of macroeconomic outlook, as explained earlier.

Stage 2 allowances decreased by € 117 million or 18 % driven by the update of macroeconomic outlook, as explained earlier.

Stage 3 allowances increased by € 169 million or 5 % driven by new defaults in Private Bank and Investment Bank as well as
the increase in allowance against the existing POCI loan portfolio, which were partly offset by the reductions in Corporate
Bank and Capital Release Unit.

Our Stage 3 coverage ratio (defined as Allowance for credit losses in Stage 3 (excluding POCI) divided by Financial assets at
amortized cost in Stage 3 (excluding POCI)) amounted to 33 % in the current fiscal year, compared to 34 % in the prior year.

Due to the positive macroeconomic outlook, transfers from stage 1 and transfers into stage 2 due to changes in
creditworthiness declined in 2021 on a year-over-year basis. Accordingly, the improved macroeconomic parameters resulted
in higher net allowance charges in stage 1 as well as higher net releases of allowance in stage 2, due to changes in
creditworthiness in the full year 2021.

In 2021, transfers into stage 3 went down compared to 2020 and resulted mostly from transfers from stage 2. This reduction
was driven by the diminished impact from COVID-19, which was partly offset by the introduction of the new definition of default
by EBA in 2021. There has been a moderate increase in net allowance charges in stage 3 due to changes in creditworthiness
in 2021.

Development of allowance for credit losses in the previous reporting period
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                       Allowance for Credit Losses³
in €                                                                                   Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI⁴                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                                 549                  492                3,015                    36                4,093
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                                          (44)                 309                1,348                   72                 1,686
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                                77                 (125)                  49                  N/M                     0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                                             N/M                   N/M                  N/M                  N/M                   N/M
Changes in models                                                                           0                     0                    0                    0                     0
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period²                                                                                      0                    0                 (781)                    0                 (781)
Recovery of written off amounts                                                              0                    0                   58                     0                   58
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                         (38)                 (28)                 (75)                   31                 (110)
Balance, end of reporting period                                                           544                  648                3,614                   139                4,946
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk¹                                         33                  184                1,397                    72                1,686
1   Movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in creditworthiness and changes in models add up to Provision for Credit Losses excluding
    country risk.
2   This position includes charge offs of allowance for credit losses.
3   Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 5 million as of December 31,2020.
4
    The total amount of undiscounted expected credit losses at initial recognition on financial assets that are purchased or originated credit-impaired initially recognized during the
    reporting period was € 50 million in 2020 and € 0 million in 2019.




                                                                                                                                                                                   83
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Allowance for credit losses against financial assets at amortized cost subject to impairment increased by € 853 million or 21 %
in 2020 mainly driven by Stage 3:

Stage 1 allowances remained roughly stable with a slight decrease of € 5 million or 1 %.

Stage 2 allowances increased by € 156 million or 32 % due to the update of the macroeconomic outlook.

Stage 3 allowances increased by € 702 million or 23 % driven by new defaults across business divisions and the increase
against the existing POCI loan portfolio.

Financial assets at amortized cost by business division
                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
                                                           Gross Carrying Amount                                    Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                             Stage 3                                                     Stage 3
in € m.                    Stage 1    Stage 2    Stage 3       POCI         Total     Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3          POCI           Total
Corporate Bank            116,332     10,165     2,113            0     128,611           56        83       901              0          1,040
Investment Bank           147,177      9,783     2,487        1,264     160,711          106        78       356            182            723
Private Bank              235,067     19,526     6,496           33     261,122          269       365     2,383              0          3,018
Asset Management            2,218         58         0            0       2,276            1         1         0              0              2
Capital Release Unit        2,743        210       212            0       3,165            2         1        99              0            103
Corporate & Other         206,734        910        18            0     207,663            6         3         1              0             10
Total                     710,271     40,653    11,326        1,297     763,548          440       532     3,740            182          4,895



                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                           Gross Carrying Amount                                    Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                             Stage 3                                                     Stage 3
in € m.                    Stage 1    Stage 2    Stage 3       POCI         Total     Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3          POCI           Total
Corporate Bank            109,484      7,747     2,305            0     119,537           85       106     1,052              0          1,244
Investment Bank           134,634      5,832     2,023        1,459     143,948          139        92       290            139            659
Private Bank              216,412     21,328     5,954          270     243,964          311       446     2,098              0          2,855
Asset Management            2,131         57         0            0       2,188            1         1         0              0              1
Capital Release Unit        4,463        303       372            0       5,138            4         4       174              0            182
Corporate & Other         184,816        105         1            0     184,922            5        (0)        0              0              5
Total                     651,941     35,372    10,655        1,729     699,697          544       648     3,614            139          4,946




                                                                                                                                             84
Deutsche Bank                                          Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                     Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Financial assets at amortized cost by industry sector
The below table gives an overview of our asset quality by industry and is based on the NACE code of the counterparty. NACE
(Nomenclature des Activités Économiques dans la Communauté Européenne) is a standard European industry classification
system. The information below is not fully congruent to the internal risk view applied in the section “Focus industries in light of
COVID-19 pandemic”.

                                                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2021
                                                                Gross Carrying Amount                                      Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                                  Stage 3                                                       Stage 3
in € m.                           Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3       POCI         Total     Stage 1     Stage 2   Stage 3          POCI            Total
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing                              544        73        29           0         646               1        1        11               0             12
Mining and quarrying               2,771        95        63           0       2,929               3        0        13               0             17
Manufacturing                     31,776     3,466       957          97      36,296              24       37       481               3            543
Electricity, gas, steam and
air conditioning supply            4,414       174       117           0       4,705               2        2        41               0             45
Water supply, sewerage,
waste management and
remediation activities               580        51        50           0         680               1        2         8               0             11
Construction                       3,672       375       271         128       4,446               8        5       178              (1)           190
Wholesale and retail trade,
repair of motor vehicles
and motorcycles                   19,582     1,355       747          32      21,717              18       19       397               3            436
Transport and storage              4,513       862       378          29       5,782              12       12        72              (0)            96
Accommodation and food
service activities                 1,356       769       122          18       2,265               1        9        62              (2)            70
Information and
communication                      6,431       257       157          16       6,860              10        4        98               0            112
Financial and insurance
activities                       359,874     6,711     1,756         491     368,832              94       48       322              55            519
Real estate activities            34,827     5,339     1,115         271      41,551              16       22        97              55            190
Professional, scientific and
technical activities               6,017       751       225          34       7,027               6        9       107               0            122
Administrative and support
service activities                 9,477     1,767       467          24      11,736              11       21       132               4            167
Public administration and
defense, compulsory social
security                          18,174     2,073        49           0      20,295               5       11         5               0             21
Education                            190        34         5           0         228               0        1         2               0              3
Human health services and
social work activities             3,620       331       105           0       4,056               4        6        18               0             28
Arts, entertainment and
recreation                           690       371        11           1       1,073               2        3         3               1              8
Other service activities           8,564       920       225         140       9,850               6       12        39              49            107
Activities of households as
employers, undifferentiated
goods- and services-
producing activities of
households for own use           193,159    14,880     4,477          16     212,532          218         309     1,653              16          2,196
Activities of extraterritorial
organizations and bodies              40         0         1           0          41            0           0         1              0               1
Total                            710,271    40,653    11,326       1,297     763,548          440         532     3,740            182           4,895




                                                                                                                                                     85
Deutsche Bank                                          Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                     Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




                                                                                                                                          Dec 31, 2020
                                                                Gross Carrying Amount                                      Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                                  Stage 3                                                       Stage 3
in € m.                           Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3       POCI         Total     Stage 1     Stage 2   Stage 3          POCI           Total
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing                              538        69        39           0         646               1        1        12               0            14
Mining and quarrying               2,808       115       162           0       3,085               4        4        98               0           106
Manufacturing                     23,245     2,518     1,024         138      26,925              32       42       479               3           557
Electricity, gas, steam and
air conditioning supply            3,268       276       117           0       3,661               3        2        35               0            40
Water supply, sewerage,
waste management and
remediation activities               573        52        57           0         681               1        2         9               0            12
Construction                       3,706       304       271         169       4,450               6        7       193               6           212
Wholesale and retail trade,
repair of motor vehicles
and motorcycles                   19,049     1,066       830          46      20,991              21       20       516               2           558
Transport and storage              4,760       710       387          12       5,869              20       18        93               0           131
Accommodation and food
service activities                 1,871       445        90          24       2,429               5        8        22               0            35
Information and
communication                      5,482       207       131           0       5,820              12        5        95               0           111
Financial and insurance
activities                       316,950     6,336     1,159         551     324,996              88       64       285              37           474
Real estate activities            38,993     2,089       824         293      42,200              32       22        94              42           190
Professional, scientific and
technical activities               6,295     1,049       223         198       7,765               8       15        97               5           125
Administrative and support
service activities                 8,966     1,365       409          47      10,787              14       22        88               1           125
Public administration and
defense, compulsory social
security                          16,648       593       229           0      17,469               8        5        11               0            24
Education                            179        23         3           0         205               0        1         1               0             2
Human health services and
social work activities             3,104       347        15           1       3,468               4        6         8               0            17
Arts, entertainment and
recreation                           874        79         9           1         961               3        1         3               0             8
Other service activities          10,548       823       180         215      11,766              13       12        21              40            86
Activities of households as
employers, undifferentiated
goods- and services-
producing activities of
households for own use           184,031    16,906     4,496          34     205,468          270         393     1,453               2         2,120
Activities of extraterritorial
organizations and bodies              52         0         1           0          53            0           0         1              0              1
Total                            651,941    35,372    10,655       1,729     699,697          544         648     3,614            139          4,946



Financial assets at amortized cost by region
                                                                                                                                          Dec 31, 2021
                                                                Gross Carrying Amount                                      Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                                  Stage 3                                                       Stage 3
                                  Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3                    Total     Stage 1     Stage 2   Stage 3                         Total
in € m.                                                             POCI                                                          POCI
Germany                          316,467    17,941     3,581          33     338,023          191         298     1,653              14         2,156
Western Europe
                                                                             148,000                                                            2,050
(excluding Germany)              134,187     9,224     3,652         937                      134         156     1,610            150
Eastern Europe                     6,818       494        99           0       7,412            2           4        53              0             59
North America                    174,574     8,853     2,131         145     185,703           53          55       180             16            304
Central and South America          3,908       206       197           7       4,318            3           0        13              2             18
Asia/Pacific                      58,984     2,351     1,518         137      62,990           45           8       227              2            282
Africa                             2,081     1,319        39           0       3,439            3          11         1              0             16
Other                             13,252       263       110          38      13,664           10           0         2             (2)            11
Total                            710,271    40,653    11,326       1,297     763,548          440         532     3,740            182          4,895




                                                                                                                                                    86
Deutsche Bank                                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




                                                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2020
                                                                           Gross Carrying Amount                                               Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                                             Stage 3                                                                Stage 3
                                     Stage 1        Stage 2     Stage 3                       Total     Stage 1          Stage 2     Stage 3                         Total
in € m.                                                                        POCI                                                                   POCI
Germany                            294,063          17,709       3,840          270        315,884            252           356       1,438              52         2,098
Western Europe
                                                                                           142,522                                                                  2,048
(excluding Germany)                130,592           7,639       3,188        1,103                           152           215       1,603             77
Eastern Europe                       5,175             214          90            0          5,480              7             2          42              0             51
North America                      144,876           6,303       2,079          105        153,362             77            57         225              7            366
Central and South America            3,731             146         374            7          4,258              4             4          32              0             40
Asia/Pacific                        57,197           2,691         973          219         61,081             31            13         273              2            318
Africa                               2,617             218          11            0          2,845              5             1           1              0              7
Other                               13,689             453          99           24         14,265             15             1           0             (0)            16
Total                              651,941          35,372      10,655        1,729        699,697            544           648       3,614            139          4,946



Financial assets at amortized cost by rating class
                                                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021
                                                                           Gross Carrying Amount                                               Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                                             Stage 3                                                                Stage 3
in € m.                              Stage 1        Stage 2     Stage 3        POCI           Total     Stage 1          Stage 2     Stage 3          POCI           Total
iAAA–iAA                           257,805             471           0            0        258,276              2             0           0              0              2
iA                                  99,418           1,325           0            9        100,753              6             1           0              0              7
iBBB                               163,434           3,938           0            0        167,371             39            12           0              0             51
iBB                                151,290          11,898           0            0        163,188            150            71           0              0            221
iB                                  33,572          17,942           0           16         51,530            205           253           0              6            463
iCCC and below                       4,752           5,079      11,326        1,272         22,430             39           195       3,740            177          4,151
Total                              710,271          40,653      11,326        1,297        763,548            440           532       3,740            182          4,895



                                                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2020
                                                                           Gross Carrying Amount                                               Allowance for Credit Losses
                                                                             Stage 3                                                                Stage 3
in € m.                              Stage 1        Stage 2     Stage 3        POCI           Total     Stage 1          Stage 2     Stage 3          POCI           Total
iAAA–iAA                           225,216             538           0            0        225,754              1             0           0              0              1
iA                                  88,250             734           0            0         88,983              5             0           0              0              5
iBBB                               150,519           2,662           0            0        153,181             43             9           0              0             52
iBB                                147,005          11,891           0            0        158,896            202            76           0              0            279
iB                                  36,178          13,674           0            0         49,851            240           251           0              0            492
iCCC and below                       4,774           5,874      10,655        1,729         23,032             54           310       3,614            139          4,117
Total                              651,941          35,372      10,655        1,729        699,697            544           648       3,614            139          4,946



Our existing commitments to lend additional funds to debtors with Stage 3 financial assets at amortized cost amounted to
€ 384 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 446 million as of December 31, 2020.

Collateral held against financial assets at amortized cost in stage 3
                                                                                               Dec 31, 2021                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                       Gross Carrying                                               Gross Carrying
in € m.                                                      Amount           Collateral        Guarantees                Amount          Collateral           Guarantees
Financial Assets at Amortized Cost (Stage
                                                              11,326             4,140                 496                10,655               3,753                  558
3)
1   Stage 3 consists here only of non-POCI assets


In 2021, collateral and guarantees held against financial assets at amortized cost in stage 3 increased by € 325 million, or 8 %
mainly driven by Investment Bank as well as by Private Bank.

Due to full collateralization we did not recognize an allowance for credit losses against Financial assets at amortized cost in
Stage 3 for € 1,130 million in 2021 and € 625 million in 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                        87
Deutsche Bank                                             Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                        Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Modified Assets at Amortized Cost

A financial asset is considered modified when its contractual cash flows are renegotiated or otherwise modified. Renegotiation
or modification may or may not lead to derecognition of the old and recognition of the new financial instrument. This section
covers modified financial assets that have not been derecognized.

Under IFRS 9, when the terms of a Financial Asset are renegotiated or modified and the modification does not result in
derecognition, a gain or loss is recognized in the income statement as the difference between the original contractual cash
flows and the modified cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate (EIR). For modified financial assets the
determination of whether the asset’s credit risk has increased significantly reflects the comparison of:

– The remaining lifetime probability of default (PD) at the reporting date based on the modified terms; with
– The remaining lifetime PD estimated based on data at initial recognition and based on the original contractual terms.

The following table provides the overview of modified financial assets at amortized cost in the reporting periods broken down
into IFRS 9 stages.

Modified Assets at Amortized Cost
                                                                                      Dec 31, 2021                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                 Stage 3                                                        Stage 3
in € m.                                        Stage 1    Stage 2    Stage 3       POCI       Total    Stage 1     Stage 2       Stage 3          POCI       Total
Amortized cost carrying amount prior to
modification                                         0         22         17           0         40          0            81          73              0       153
Net modification gain/losses recognized             (1)         0        (16)          0        (16)         0             2         (30)             0       (29)


In 2021, we have observed the decrease of € 113 million or 74 % in modified assets at amortized cost due to the non-recurring
large client related modifications, which were granted in 2020. We did not include any COVID-19 driven modifications into the
above table. For further details related to COVID-19 driven modifications, please refer to “Legislative and non-legislative
moratoria and public guarantee schemes in light of COVID-19 pandemic”

In 2021, we have not observed any amounts of modified assets that have been upgraded to stage 1. We have not observed
any subsequent re-deterioration of those assets into stages 2 and 3.

In 2020, we have observed immaterial amounts of modified assets that have been upgraded to stage 1. We have not observed
any subsequent re-deterioration of those assets into stages 2 and 3.

Financial Assets at Fair value through Other Comprehensive Income

The fair value of financial assets at Fair value through Other Comprehensive Income (FVOCI) subject to impairment was
€ 29 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to € 56 billion at December 31, 2020. Allowance for credit losses against these
assets remained at very low levels (€ 41 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 20 million as of December 31, 2020). Due to
immateriality no further breakdown is provided for financial assets at FVOCI.

Off-balance sheet lending commitments and guarantee business

The following tables provide an overview of the nominal amount and credit loss allowance for our off-balance sheet financial
asset class broken down into stages as per IFRS 9 requirements.

Development of nominal amount in the current reporting period
                                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                   Nominal Amount
in € m.                                                                Stage 1             Stage 2           Stage 3           Stage 3 POCI                  Total
Balance, beginning of year                                            251,545               8,723                2,587                      1             262,856
Movements including new business                                       11,197               3,236                 (273)                    10              14,170
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                           (2,177)              2,019                  158                      0                   0
Changes in models                                                           0                   0                    0                      0                   0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                      8,292                 521                  110                      0               8,923
Balance, end of reporting period                                      268,857              14,498                2,582                     11             285,948
  of which: Financial guarantees                                       55,477               2,975                1,036                      0              59,488




                                                                                                                                                                88
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                  Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Development of nominal amount in the previous reporting period
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                             Nominal Amount
in € m.                                                                            Stage 1              Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                        251,930                5,864                1,424                    0              259,218
Movements including new business                                                   16,918               (2,786)                 126                    1               14,259
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                       (7,247)               6,101                1,146                    0                    0
Changes in models                                                                       0                    0                    0                    0                    0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                (10,056)                (455)                (110)                   0              (10,622)
Balance, end of reporting period                                                  251,545                8,723                2,587                    1              262,856
  of which: Financial guarantees                                                   45,064                1,887                1,031                    0               47,982


Development of allowance for credit losses in the current reporting period


                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                 Allowance for Credit Losses2
in € m.                                                                            Stage 1              Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                             144                  74                  200                    0                   419
Movements including new business                                                       (43)                 38                   18                    0                    13
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                             3                  (5)                   2                    0                     0
Changes in models                                                                        0                   0                    0                    0                     0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                       3                   3                    6                    0                    12
Balance, end of reporting period                                                       108                 111                  225                    0                   443
  of which: Financial guarantees                                                        69                  64                  164                    0                   297
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk1                                    (40)                 33                   19                    0                    13
1
    The above table breaks down the impact on provision for credit losses from movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in
    creditworthiness and changes in models.
2
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 6 million as of December 31, 2021.


Development of allowance for credit losses in the previous reporting period
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                 Allowance for Credit Losses2
in € m.                                                                            Stage 1              Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                             128                   48                 166                    0                   342
Movements including new business                                                        13                   21                  41                    0                    75
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                             0                    0                  (1)                   0                     0
Changes in models                                                                        0                    0                   0                    0                     0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                       3                    4                  (6)                   0                     1
Balance, end of reporting period                                                       144                   74                 200                    0                   419
  of which: Financial guarantees                                                        99                   43                 115                    0                   257
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk1                                     13                   22                  40                    0                    75
1
    The above table breaks down the impact on provision for credit losses from movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in
    creditworthiness and changes in models.
2
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 4 million as of December 31, 2020.


Legal Claims

Assets subject to enforcement activity consist of assets, which have been fully or partially written off and the Group still
continues to pursue recovery of the asset. Such enforcement activity comprises for example cases where the bank continues
to devote resources (e.g. our Legal Department/CRM workout unit) towards recovery, either via legal channels or third party
recovery agents. Enforcement activity also applies to cases where the Bank maintains outstanding and unsettled legal claims.
This is irrespective of whether amounts are expected to be recovered and the recovery timeframe. It may be common practice
in certain jurisdictions for recovery cases to span several years.

Amounts outstanding on financial assets that were written off during the reporting period and are still subject to enforcemen t
activity amounted to € 234 million in fiscal year 2021, mainly in Corporate Bank, Investment Bank and Private Bank. In 2020,
legal claims amounted to € 295 million, mainly in Corporate Bank, Investment Bank and Private Bank.




                                                                                                                                                                             89
Deutsche Bank                                            Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                       Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Renegotiated and forborne assets at amortized costs

For economic or legal reasons we might enter into a forbearance agreement with a borrower who faces or will face financial
difficulties in order to ease the contractual obligation for a limited period of time. A case-by-case approach is applied for our
corporate clients considering each transaction and client-specific facts and circumstances. For consumer loans we offer
forbearances for a limited period of time, in which the total or partial outstanding or future instalments are deferred to a later
point of time. However, the amount not paid including accrued interest during this period must be re-compensated at a later
point of time. Repayment options include distribution over residual tenor, a one-off payment or a tenor extension. Forbearances
are restricted and depending on the economic situation of the client, our risk management strategies and the local legislation.
In case a forbearance agreement is entered into, an impairment measurement is conducted as described below, an impairment
charge is taken if necessary and the loan is subsequently recorded as impaired.

In our management and reporting of forborne assets at amortized costs, we are following the EBA definition for forbearances
and non-performing loans (Implementing Technical Standards (ITS) on Supervisory reporting on forbearance and non-
performing exposures under article 99(4) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013). Once the conditions mentioned in the ITS are met,
we report the loan as being forborne; we remove the asset from our forbearance reporting, once the discontinuance criteria in
the ITS are met (i.e., the contract is considered as performing, a minimum two year probation period has passed, regular
payments of more than an insignificant aggregate amount of principal or interest have been made during at least half of the
probation period, and none of the exposures to the debtor is more than 30 days past-due at the end of the probation period).

In 2020, forbearance measures granted as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic have been added to the above
regulations and are included in the following table, even if these measures, in accordance with EBA guidance, do in general
not trigger a stage transition. COVID-19 related moratoria in contrast are not relevant for the below table. For further details
please refer to the section “Legislative and non-legislative moratoria and public guarantee schemes in light of COVID-19
pandemic”.

Forborne financial assets at amortized cost
                                                                       Dec 31, 2021                                                          Dec 31, 2020
                                                                               Total                                                                 Total
                                                                           forborne                                                              forborne
                                                                            loans at                                                              loans at
                                                                           amortize                                                              amortize
                                                                                  d                                                                     d
                               Performing                 Non-performing        cost             Performing                  Non-performing           cost
in € m.              Stage 1     Stage 2    Stage 1   Stage 2    Stage 3               Stage 1      Stage 2   Stage 1   Stage 2        Stage 3
German                  690       1,903          0        17      1,056      3,665      1,014        1,404         2         18         1,297     3,735
Non-German            2,478       3,489        135        25      3,949     10,076      4,515        2,388        10         35         2,775     9,723
Total                 3,168       5,391        135        42      5,004     13,741      5,529        3,792        12         53         4,072    13,459



Development of forborne financial assets at amortized cost
in € m.                                                                                                                 Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
Balance beginning of period                                                                                                 13,459                4,796
Classified as forborne during the year                                                                                       4,945               10,141
Transferred to non-forborne during the year (including repayments)                                                          (4,934)              (1,371)
Charge-offs                                                                                                                    (43)                 (35)
Exchange rate and other movements                                                                                              313                  (72)
Balance end of period                                                                                                       13,741               13,459



Forborne assets at amortized cost slightly increased by € 282 million, or 2 % in 2021.

Forborne assets at amortized cost increased by € 8.7 billion in 2020, predominantly due to the inclusion of Forbearance
measures granted as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Forborne assets at amortized cost slightly decreased by € 45 million, or 1 % in 2019.




                                                                                                                                                       90
Deutsche Bank                                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                                 Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Collateral Obtained

We obtain collateral on the balance sheet only in certain cases by either taking possession of collateral held as security or by
calling upon other credit enhancements. Collateral obtained is made available for sale in an orderly fashion or through public
auctions, with the proceeds used to repay or reduce outstanding indebtedness. Generally we do not occupy obtained
properties for our business use. The residential real estate collateral obtained in 2020 refers predominantly to our exposures
in Spain.

Collateral Obtained during the reporting period
in € m.                                                                                                                                           2021               2020²
Commercial real estate                                                                                                                               0                  15
Residential real estate1                                                                                                                             2                  43
Other                                                                                                                                                0                   3
Total collateral obtained during the reporting period                                                                                                2                  60
1
    Carrying amount of foreclosed residential real estate properties amounted to € 67 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 89 million as of December 31,2020. (Numbers have
    been restated compared to prior year disclosure).
2
    Numbers have been restated compared to prior year disclosure.


The collateral obtained, as shown in the table above, excludes collateral recorded as a result of consolidating securitization
trusts under IFRS 10. In 2021 the Group obtained € 46 million collateral related to these trusts, compared to € 54 million in
2020 .

Derivatives – Credit Valuation Adjustment

We establish counterparty Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA) for OTC derivative transactions to cover expected credit losses.
The adjustment amount is determined by assessing the potential credit exposure to a given counterparty and taking into
account any collateral held, the effect of any relevant netting arrangements, expected loss given default and the credit risk,
based on available market information, including CDS spreads.

Treatment of default situations under derivatives

Unlike standard loan assets, we generally have more options to manage the credit risk in our derivatives transactions when
movement in the current replacement costs or the behavior of our counterparty indicate that there is the risk that upcoming
payment obligations under the transactions might not be honored. In these situations, we are frequently able under the relevant
derivatives agreements to obtain additional collateral or to terminate and close-out the derivative transactions at short notice.

The master agreements and associated collateralization agreements for OTC derivative transactions executed with our clients
typically result in the majority of our credit exposure being secured by collateral. It also provides for a broad set of standard or
bespoke termination rights, which allow us to respond swiftly to a counterparty’s default or to other circumstances which
indicate a high probability of failure.

Our contractual termination rights are supported by internal policies and procedures with defined roles and responsibilities
which ensure that potential counterparty defaults are identified and addressed in a timely fashion. These procedures include
necessary settlement and trading restrictions. When our decision to terminate derivative transactions results in a residual net
obligation owed by the counterparty, we restructure the obligation into a non-derivative claim and manage it through our
regular work-out process. As a consequence, for accounting purposes we typically do not show any nonperforming derivatives.

Wrong-way risk occurs when exposure to a counterparty is adversely correlated with the credit quality of that counterparty. In
compliance with Article 291(2) and (4) CRR we have a monthly process to monitor several layers of wrong-way risk (specific
wrong-way risk, general explicit wrong-way risk at country/industry/region levels and general implicit wrong-way risk, whereby
relevant exposures arising from transactions subject to wrong-way risk are automatically selected and presented for comment
to the responsible credit officer). A wrong-way risk report is then sent to Credit Risk senior management on a monthly basis.
In addition, we utilized our established process for calibrating our own alpha factor (as defined in Article 284 (9) CRR) to
estimate the overall wrong-way risk in our derivatives and securities financing transactions portfolio. The Private Bank
Germany’s derivative counterparty risk is immaterial to the Group and collateral held is typically in the form of cash.




                                                                                                                                                                         91
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Managing and mitigation of Credit Risk
Managing Credit Risk on counterparty level

Credit-related counterparties are principally allocated to credit officers within credit teams which are organized by types of
counterparty (such as financial institutions, corporates or private individuals) or economic area (e.g., emerging markets) and
supported by dedicated rating analyst teams where deemed necessary. The individual credit officers have the relevant
expertise and experience to manage the credit risks associated with these counterparties and their associated credit related
transactions. For retail clients, credit decision making and credit monitoring is highly automated for efficiency reasons. Credit
Risk Management has full oversight of the respective processes and tools used in these highly automated retail credit
processes. It is the responsibility of each credit officer to undertake ongoing credit monitoring for their allocated portfol io of
counterparties. We also have procedures in place intended to identify at an early stage credit exposures for which there may
be an increased risk of loss.

In instances where we have identified counterparties where there is a concern that the credit quality has deteriorated or
appears likely to deteriorate to the point where they present a heightened risk of loss in default, the respective exposure is
generally placed on a “watchlist”. We aim to identify counterparties that, on the basis of the application of our risk management
tools, demonstrate the likelihood of problems well in advance in order to effectively manage the credit exposure and minimize
potential losses. The objective of this early warning system is to address potential problems while adequate options for action
are still available. This early risk detection is a tenet of our credit culture and is intended to ensure that greater attention is
paid to such exposures.

Credit limits are established by the Credit Risk Management function via the execution of assigned credit authorities. This also
applies to settlement risk that must fall within limits pre-approved by Credit Risk Management considering risk appetite and in
a manner that reflects expected settlement patterns for the subject counterparty. Credit approvals are documented by the
signing of the credit report by the respective credit authority holders and retained for future reference.

Credit authority is generally assigned to individuals as personal credit authority according to the individual’s professional
qualification, experience and training. All assigned credit authorities are reviewed on a periodic basis to help ensure that they
are commensurate with the individual performance of the authority holder.

Where an individual’s personal authority is insufficient to establish required credit limits, the transaction is referred to a higher
credit authority holder or where necessary to an appropriate credit committee. Where personal and committee authorities are
insufficient to establish appropriate limits, the case is referred to the Management Board for approval.

Mitigation of Credit Risk on counterparty level

In addition to determining counterparty credit quality and our risk appetite, we also use various credit risk mitigation techniques
to optimize credit exposure and reduce potential credit losses. Credit risk mitigants are applied in the following forms:

– Comprehensive and enforceable credit documentation with adequate terms and conditions.
– Collateral in its various forms to reduce losses by increasing the recovery of obligations. Key principles for collateral
  management include legal effectiveness and enforceability, prudent and realistic collateral valuations, risk and regulatory
  capital reduction, as well as cost efficiency.
– Risk transfers, which shift the risk of default of an obligor to a third party including hedging executed by our Strategic
  Corporate Lending (SCL). Other de-risking tools such as securitizations etc. may also be employed
– Netting and collateral arrangements which reduce the credit exposure from derivatives and securities financing transactions
  (e.g. repo transactions).
– Hedging of derivatives counterparty risk including CVA, using primarily CDS contracts via our Counterparty Portfolio
  Management desk

Collateral
We regularly agree on collateral to be received from customers that are subject to credit risk or to be provided by third parties
agreed by legally effective and enforceable contracts, documented by a written and reasoned legal opinion. Collateral is credit
protection in the form of (funded) assigned or pledged assets or (unfunded) third-party obligations that serves to mitigate the
inherent risk of credit loss in an exposure, by either substituting the counterparty default risk or improving recoveries in the
event of a default. We generally take all types of valuable and eligible collateral for our respective businesses but may limit
accepted collateral types for specific businesses or regions as customary in the respective market or driven by purpose of
efficiency. While collateral can be an alternative source of repayment, it does not replace the necessity of high quality
underwriting standards and a thorough assessment of the debt service ability of the counterparty in line with CRR Article
194 (9).




                                                                                                                                  92
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                 Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




We segregate collateral received into the following two types:

– Financial and other collateral, which enables us to recover all or part of the outstanding exposure by liquidating the collateral
  asset provided, in cases where the counterparty is unable or unwilling to fulfill its primary obligations. Cash collateral,
  securities (equity, bonds), collateral pledges or assignments of other claims or inventory, movable assets (i.e., plant,
  machinery, ships and aircraft) and real estate typically fall into this category. All financial collateral is regularly, mostly daily,
  revalued and measured against the respective credit exposure. The value of other collateral, including real estate, is
  monitored based upon established processes that includes regular reviews or revaluations by internal and/or external
  experts.
– Guarantee collateral, which complements the counterparty’s ability to fulfill its obligation under the legal contract and as
  such is provided by uncorrelated third parties. Letters of credit, insurance contracts, export credit insurance, guarantees,
  credit derivatives and risk participations typically fall into this category. Guarantees and strong letters of comfort provided
  by correlated group members of customers (generally the parent company) are also accepted and used for risk transfer in
  approved rating scorecards. Guarantee collateral with a non-investment grade rating of the guarantor is limited.

Our processes seek to ensure that the collateral we accept for risk mitigation purposes is of high quality. This includes
processes to generally ensure legally effective and enforceable documentation for realizable and measurable collateral assets
which are evaluated within the on-boarding process by dedicated internal appraisers or teams with the respective qualification,
skills and experience or adequate external valuers mandated in regulated processes. The applied valuations follow generally
accepted valuation methods or models. Ongoing correctness of values is monitored by collateral type specific appropriate
frequent and event-driven reviews considering relevant risk parameters. Revaluations are applied in cases of identified
probable material deterioration and future monitoring may be adjusted respectively. The assessment of the suitability of
collateral for a specific transaction is part of the credit decision and must be undertaken in a conservative way, including
collateral haircuts that are applied. We have collateral type specific haircuts in place which are regularly reviewed and
approved. In this regard, we strive to avoid “wrong-way” risk characteristics where the counterparty’s risk is positively
correlated with the risk of deterioration in the collateral value. For guarantee collateral, the process for the analysis of the
guarantor’s creditworthiness is aligned to the credit assessment process for counterparties.

The valuation of collateral is considered under a liquidation scenario. Liquidation value is equal to the expected proceeds of
collateral monetization / realization in a base case scenario, wherein a fair price is achieved through careful preparation and
orderly liquidation of the collateral. Collateral can either move in value over time (dynamic value) or not (static value). T he
dynamic liquidation value generally includes a safety margin or haircut over realizable value to address liquidity and
marketability aspects.

The Group assigns a liquidation value to eligible collateral, based on, among other things:

– the market value and / or lending value, notional amount or face value of a collateral as a starting point;
– the type of collateral; the currency mismatch, if any, between the secured exposure and the collateral; and a maturity
  mismatch, if any;
– the applicable legal environment or jurisdiction (onshore versus offshore collateral);
– the market liquidity and volatility in relation to agreed termination clauses;
– the correlation between the performance of the borrower and the value of the collateral, e.g., in the case of the pledge of a
  borrower’s own shares or securities (in this case generally full correlation leads to no liquidation value);
– the quality of physical collateral and potential for litigation or environmental risks; and
– a determined collateral type specific haircut (0 – 100 %) reflecting collection risks (i.e. price risks over the average
  liquidation period and processing/utilization/sales costs) as specified in the respective policies.

Collateral haircut settings are typically based on available historic internal and/or external recovery data (expert opinions may
also be used, where appropriate). They also incorporate a forward-looking component in the form of collection and valuation
forecast provided by experts within Risk Management. Considering the expected proceeds from the liquidation of the different
collateral types, respective value fluctuations, market specific liquidation costs and time applied haircuts vary between 0 to
100 %. When data is not sufficiently available or inconclusive, more conservative haircuts than otherwise used must be
applied. Haircut settings are reviewed at least annually.

Risk transfers
Risk transfers to third parties form a key part of our overall risk management process and are executed in various forms,
including outright sales, single name and portfolio hedging, and securitizations. Risk transfers are conducted by the respective
business units and by Strategic Corporate Lending (“SCL”), in accordance with specifically approved mandates.

SCL manages the residual credit risk of loans and lending-related commitments of the institutional and corporate credit
portfolio, the leveraged portfolio and the medium-sized German companies’ portfolio across our CB and IB divisions.




                                                                                                                                    93
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Acting as a central pricing reference, SCL provides the businesses with an observed or derived capital market rate for loan
applications; however, the decision of whether or not the business can enter into the credit risk remains exclusively with Credit
Risk Management.

SCL concentrates on two primary objectives within the credit risk framework to enhance risk management discipline, improve
returns and use capital more efficiently:

– to reduce single-name credit risk concentrations within the credit portfolio and
– to manage credit exposures by utilizing techniques including loan sales, securitization via collateralized loan obligations,
  sub-participations and single-name and portfolio credit default swaps.

Netting and collateral arrangements for derivatives and Securities Financing Transactions
Netting is applicable to both exchange traded derivatives and OTC derivatives. Netting is also applied to securities financing
transactions (e.g. repurchase, securities lending and margin lending transactions) as far as documentation, structure and
nature of the risk mitigation allow netting with the underlying credit risk in accordance with applicable law and the Bank’s
Financial Contracts Netting and Collateral Policies and Procedures – Legal (collectively, “Netting Policies”)..

All exchange traded derivatives are cleared through central counterparties (CCPs), which interpose themselves between the
trading entities by becoming the counterparty to each of the entities. Where legally required or where available and to the
extent agreed with our counterparties, we also use CCP clearing for our OTC derivative transactions.

The Dodd-Frank Act and related Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) rules require CCP clearing in the United
States for certain standardized OTC derivative transactions, including certain interest rate swaps and index credit default
swaps, subject to limited exceptions when facing certain counterparties. The European Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 on OTC
Derivatives, Central Counterparties and Trade Repositories (EMIR) and the Commission Delegated Regulations (EU)
2015/2205, (EU) 2015/592 and (EU) 2016/1178 based thereupon introduced mandatory CCP clearing in the EU for certain
standardized OTC derivatives transactions. Mandatory CCP clearing in the EU began for certain interest rate derivatives on
June 21, 2016 and for certain iTraxx-based credit derivatives and additional interest rate derivatives on February 9, 2017.
Article 4 (2) of EMIR authorizes competent authorities to exempt intragroup transactions from mandatory CCP clearing,
provided certain requirements, such as full consolidation of the intragroup transactions and the application of an appropriate
centralized risk evaluation, measurement and control procedure are met. The Bank successfully applied for the clearing
exemption for a number of its regulatory-consolidated subsidiaries with intragroup derivatives, including e.g., Deutsche Bank
Securities Inc. and Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank is allowed to make use of intragroup
exemptions from the EMIR clearing obligation for 57 bilateral intragroup relationships. The extent of the exemptions differs as
not all entities enter into relevant transaction types subject to the clearing obligation. Of the 57 intragroup relationships, 14 are
relationships where both entities are established in the Union (EU) for which a full exemption has been granted, and 43 are
relationships where one is established in a third country (“Third Country Relationship”). Third Country Relationships required
repeat applications for each new asset class being subject to the clearing obligation; the process took place in the course of
2017. Such repeat applications, at the time, were filed for 39 of the Third Country Relationships, with a number of those entities
having been liquidated in the meantime. Due to “Brexit”, the status of some group entities has changed from an EU entity to
a third country entity. There are two affected UK group entities, but we have not applied for any EMIR clearing exemption for
those entities.

The rules and regulations of CCPs typically provide for the bilateral set off of all amounts payable on the same day and in the
same currency (“payment netting”) thereby reducing our settlement risk. Depending on the business model applied by the
CCP, this payment netting applies either to all of our derivatives cleared by the CCP or at least to those that form part of the
same class of derivatives. Many CCPs’ rules and regulations also provide for the termination, close-out and netting of all
cleared transactions upon the CCP’s default (“close-out netting”), which reduces our credit risk. In our risk measurement and
risk assessment processes we apply close-out netting only to the extent we believe that the relevant CCP’s close-out netting
provisions are legally valid and enforceable and have been approved in accordance with the Bank’s Netting Policies.

In order to reduce the credit risk resulting from OTC derivative transactions, where CCP clearing is not available, we regularly
seek the execution of standard master agreements (such as master agreements for derivatives published by the International
Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. (ISDA) or the German Master Agreement for Financial Derivative Transactions) with
our counterparties. A master agreement allows for the close-out netting of rights and obligations arising under derivative
transactions that have been entered into under such a master agreement upon the counterparty’s default, resulting in a single
net claim owed by or to the counterparty. Payment netting may be agreed from time to time with our counterparties for multiple
transactions having the same payment dates (e.g., foreign exchange transactions) pursuant to the terms of master agreements
which can, reduce our settlement risk. In our risk measurement and risk assessment processes we apply close-out netting
only to the extent we have concluded that the master agreement is legally valid and enforceable in all relevant jurisdictions
and the recognition of close-out netting has been approved in accordance with the Bank’s Netting Policies.




                                                                                                                                  94
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




We also enter into credit support annexes (CSAs) to master agreements in order to further reduce our derivatives-related
credit risk. These annexes generally provide risk mitigation through periodic, usually daily, margining of the covered exposure.
The CSAs also provide for the right to terminate the related derivative transactions upon the counterparty’s failure to honor a
margin call. As with netting, when we believe the annex is enforceable, we reflect this in our exposure measurement.

Certain CSAs to master agreements provide for rating-dependent triggers, where additional collateral must be pledged if a
party’s rating is downgraded. We also enter into master agreements that provide for an additional termination event upon a
party’s rating downgrade. These downgrade provisions in CSAs and master agreements usually apply to both parties but in
some agreements may apply to us only. We analyze and monitor our potential contingent payment obligations resulting from
a rating downgrade in our stress testing and liquidity coverage ratio approach for liquidity risk on an ongoing basis. For an
assessment of the quantitative impact of a downgrading of our credit rating please refer to table “Stress Testing Results” in
the section “Liquidity Risk”.

The Dodd-Frank Act and CFTC rules thereunder, including CFTC rule § 23.504, as well as EMIR and Commission Delegated
Regulation based thereon, namely Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2251, introduced the mandatory use of
master agreements and related CSAs, which must be executed prior to or contemporaneously with entering into an uncleared
OTC derivative transaction. Certain documentation is also required by the U.S. margin rules adopted by U.S. prudential
regulators. Under the U.S. prudential regulators’ margin rules, we are required to post and collect initial margin for our
derivatives exposures with other derivatives dealers, as well as with our counterparties that (a) are “financial end users,” as
that term is defined in the U.S. margin rules, and (b) have an average daily aggregate notional amount of uncleared swaps,
uncleared security-based swaps, foreign exchange forwards and foreign exchange swaps exceeding U.S.$ 8 billion in June,
July and August of the previous calendar year. The U.S. margin rules additionally require us to post and collect variation
margin for our derivatives with other derivatives dealers and certain financial end user counterparties. These margin
requirements are subject to a U.S.$ 50 million threshold for initial margin, but no threshold for variation margin, with a combined
U.S.$ 500,000 minimum transfer amount. The U.S. margin requirements have been in effect for large banks since September
2016, with additional variation margin requirements having come into effect March 1, 2017 and additional initial margin
requirements are being phased in from September 2017 through September 2022.

Under Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2251, which implements the EMIR margin requirements, the CSA must
provide for daily valuation and daily variation margining based on a zero threshold and a minimum transfer amount of not
more than € 500,000. For large derivative exposures exceeding € 8 billion, initial margin has to be posted as well. The variation
margin requirements under EMIR apply as of March 1, 2017; the initial margin requirements originally were subject to a staged
phase-in until September 1, 2021. However, legislative changes have been published on February 17, 2021 that, among
others, will extend deadlines into 2022. Under Article 31 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2251, an EU party
may decide to not exchange margin with counterparties in certain non-netting jurisdictions provided certain requirements are
met. Pursuant to Article 11 (5) to (10) of EMIR, competent authorities are authorized to exempt intragroup transactions from
the margining obligation, provided certain requirements are met. While some of those requirements are the same as for the
EMIR clearing exemptions (see above), there are additional requirements such as the absence of any current or foreseen
practical or legal impediment to the prompt transfer of funds or repayment of liabilities between intragroup counterparties. The
Bank is making use of this exemption. The Bank has successfully applied for the collateral exemption for some of its regulatory-
consolidated subsidiaries with intragroup derivatives, including, e.g., Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. and Deutsche Bank
Luxembourg S.A. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank is allowed to use intragroup exemptions from the EMIR collateral
obligation for a number of bilateral intragroup relationships which are published under db.com/legal-resources/european-
market-infrastructure-regulation/intra-group-exemptions-margining. For third country subsidiaries, the intragroup exemption is
currently limited until the earlier of June 30, 2022 and four months after the publication of an equivalence decision by the EU
Commission under Article 13(2) EMIR, unless, in the case of an equivalence decision being applicable, a follow-up exemption
application is made and granted. We have prepared for intragroup margining and will implement collateral exchange as and
when the intragroup exemptions are formally withdrawn by the competent authority For some bilateral intragroup relationships,
the EMIR margining exemption may be used based on Article 11 (5) of EMIR, i.e. without the need for any application, because
both entities are established in the same EU Member State.

Concentrations within Credit Risk mitigation
Concentrations within credit risk mitigations taken may occur if a number of guarantors and credit derivative providers with
similar economic characteristics are engaged in comparable activities with changes in economic or industry conditions
affecting their ability to meet contractual obligations. Concentration risk may also occur in collateral portfolios (e.g. multip le
claims and receivables against third parties) which are considered conservatively within the valuation process and/or on -site
inspections where applicable. We use a range of tools and metrics to monitor our credit risk mitigating activities and associated
concentrations.

For more qualitative and quantitative details in relation to the application of credit risk mitigation and potential concentration
effects please refer to the section “Maximum Exposure to Credit Risk”.




                                                                                                                                95
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Managing Credit Risk on portfolio level

Enterprise Risk & Credit Risk Portfolio Management (ER & CR PM) sets the framework for the management of concentration
risks at a portfolio level. This includes strategically setting, monitoring and reviewing credit risk appetites across various
dimensions such as Group, Division, Business Unit, Legal Entity, Branch, Asset Class, Country, and Industry level that need
to be considered in the context of credit approvals. In addition, ER & CR PM also provides a comprehensive and holistic view
of the Bank’s risk profile across risk types.

On a portfolio level, significant concentrations of credit risk could result from having material exposures to a number of
counterparties with similar economic characteristics, or who are engaged in comparable activities, where these similarities
may cause their ability to meet contractual obligations to be affected in the same manner by changes in economic or industry
conditions.

Our portfolio management framework supports a comprehensive assessment of concentrations within our credit risk portfolio
in order to keep concentrations within acceptable levels.

Industry risk management
To manage industry risk, we have grouped our corporate and financial institutions counterparties into various industry sub-
portfolios. Portfolios are regularly reviewed with the frequency of review dependent on portfolio size and risk profile as well as
risk developments. Larger / riskier portfolios are reviewed at least on an annual basis. Reviews highlight industry developments
and risks to our credit portfolio, review cross-risk concentration risks, analyze the risk/reward profile of the portfolio and
incorporate the results of an economic downside stress test. Finally, this analysis is used to define the credit strategies for the
portfolio in question.

In our Industry Limit framework, thresholds are established for aggregate credit limits to counterparties within ea ch industry
sub-portfolio. For risk management purposes, the aggregation of limits across industry sectors follows an internal risk view
that does not have to be congruent with NACE (Nomenclature des Activities Economiques dans la Communate Europeenne)
code-based view applied elsewhere in this report. Regular overviews are prepared for the Enterprise Risk Committee to
discuss recent developments and to agree on actions where necessary.

Beyond credit risk, our Industry Risk Framework comprises of thresholds for Traded Credit Positions while key non-financial
risks are closely monitored.

Country risk management
Avoiding undue concentrations from a regional perspective is also an integral part of our credit risk management framework.
In order to achieve this, country risk thresholds are applied to Emerging Markets as well as selected Developed Markets
countries (based on internal country risk ratings). Emerging Markets are divided into regions. Similar to industry risk, country
portfolios are regularly reviewed with the frequency of review dependent on portfolio size and risk profile as well as risk
developments. Larger / riskier portfolios are reviewed at least on an annual basis. These reviews assess key macroeconomic
developments and outlook, review portfolio composition and quality, cross-risk concentration risks and analyze the risk/reward
profile of the portfolio. Based on this, country risk appetite and strategies are set.

In our Country Risk Framework, thresholds are established for counterparty credit risk exposures in each country to manage
the aggregated credit risk subject to country-specific economic and political events. These thresholds cover exposures to
entities incorporated locally and subsidiaries of foreign multinational corporations as well as companies with significant
economic or operational dependence on a specific country even though they are incorporated externally. In addition, gap risk
thresholds are set to control the risk of loss due to intra-country wrong-way risk exposure. As such, for risk management
purposes, the aggregation of exposures across countries follows an internal risk view that may differ from the geographical
exposure view applied elsewhere in this report. Beyond credit risk, our Country Risk Framework comprises thresholds for
trading positions in Emerging Markets and selective Developed Markets that measure the aggregate market value of traded
credit risk positions. For Emerging Markets, thresholds are also set to measure the Profit and Loss impact under specific
country stress scenarios on trading positions across the Bank’s portfolio. Furthermore, thresholds are set for capital and intra-
group funding exposure of Deutsche Bank entities in above countries given the transfer risk inherent in these cross-border
positions. Key non-financial risks are closely monitored. Our country risk ratings represent a key tool in our management of
country risk. They include:

– Sovereign rating (set and managed by ERM): A measure of the probability of the sovereign defaulting on its foreign or local
  currency obligations.
– Transfer risk rating (set and managed by ERM): A measure of the probability of a “transfer risk event”, i.e., the risk that an
  otherwise solvent debtor is unable to meet its obligations due to inability to obtain foreign currency or to transfer assets as
  a result of direct sovereign intervention.

All sovereign and transfer risk ratings are reviewed, at least on an annual basis.


                                                                                                                                96
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality




Product/Asset class specific risk management
Complementary to our counterparty, industry and country risk approach, we focus on product/asset class specific risk
concentrations and set limits or thresholds where required for risk management purposes. Specific risk limits are set in
particular if a concentration of transactions of a specific type might lead to significant losses under certain conditions. In this
respect, correlated losses might result from disruptions of the functioning of financial markets, significant moves in market
parameters to which the respective product is sensitive, macroeconomic default scenarios or other factors. Specific focus is
put on transactions with underwriting risks where we underwrite commitments with the intention to sell down or distribute part
of the risk to third parties. These commitments include the undertaking to provide bank loans for syndication into the debt
capital market and bridge loans for the issuance of notes. The inherent risks of being unsuccessful in the distribution of the
facilities or the placement of the notes, comprise of a delayed distribution, funding of the underlying loans as well as a pricing
risk as some underwriting commitments are additionally exposed to market risk in the form of widening credit spreads. Where
applicable, we dynamically hedge this credit spread risk to be within the approved market risk limit framework.

A major asset class, in which Deutsche Bank is active in underwriting, is leverage lending, which we mainly execute through
our Leveraged Debt Capital Markets (LDCM) business unit. The business model is a fee-based‚ originate to distribute
approach focused on the distribution of largely unfunded underwriting commitments into the capital market. The
aforementioned risks regarding distribution and credit spread movement apply to this business unit, however, are managed
under a range of specific notional as well as market risk limits. The latter require the business to also hedge its underwriting
pipeline against market dislocations. The fee-based model of our LDCM business unit includes a restrictive approach to single-
name risk concentrations retained on Deutsche Bank‘s balance sheet, which results in a diversified overall portfolio without
any material concentrations. The resulting longer-term on-balance sheet portfolio is also subject to a comprehensive credit
limit and hedging framework.

Deutsche Bank also assumes underwriting risk with respect to Commercial Real Estate (CRE) loans, primarily in the CRE
business unit in the Investment Bank where loans may be originated with the intent to securitize in the capital markets or
syndicate to other lenders. The aforementioned inherent underwriting risks such as delayed distribution and pricing risk are
managed through notional caps, market risk limits and hedging against the risk of market dislocations.

In addition to underwriting risk, we also focus on concentration of transactions with specific risk dynamics (including risk to
commercial real estate and risk from securitization positions).

In addition, our Private Bank and certain Corporate Bank businesses are managed via product-specific strategies setting our
risk appetite for portfolios with similar credit risk characteristics, such as the retail portfolios of mortgages and consume r
finance products as well as products for business clients. Here risk analyses are performed on portfolio level including further
breakdown into Business Units as well as Countries / Regions. Analysis for individual clients is of secondary importance. In
Wealth Management, target levels are set for global concentrations along products as well as based on type and liquidity of
collateral.




                                                                                                                                97
Deutsche Bank                                   Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                              Market Risk Management




Market Risk Management
Market Risk framework
The vast majority of our businesses are subject to market risk, defined as the potential for change in the market value of ou r
trading and invested positions. Risk can arise from changes in interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates, equity
prices, commodity prices and other relevant parameters, such as market volatility and market implied default probabilities.
The market risk can affect accounting, economic and regulatory views of our exposure.

Market Risk Management is part of our independent Risk function and sits within the Market and Valuations Risk Management
group. One of the primary objectives of Market Risk Management is to ensure that our business units’ risk exposure is within
the approved risk appetite commensurate with its defined strategy. To achieve this objective, Market Risk Management works
closely together with risk takers (“the business units”) and other control and support groups.

We distinguish between three substantially different types of market risk:

– Trading market risk arises primarily through the market-making and client facilitation activities of the Investment Bank and
  Corporate Bank divisions. This involves taking positions in debt, equity, foreign exchange, other securities and commodities
  as well as in equivalent derivatives.
– Traded default risk arising from defaults and rating migrations relating to trading instruments.
– Nontrading market risk arises from market movements, primarily outside the activities of our trading units, in our banking
  book and from off-balance sheet items. This includes interest rate risk, credit spread risk, investment risk and foreign
  exchange risk as well as market risk arising from our pension schemes, guaranteed funds and equity compensation.
  Nontrading market risk also includes risk from the modeling of client deposits as well as savings and loan products.

Market Risk Management governance is designed and established to promote oversight of all market risks, effective decision-
making and timely escalation to senior management.

Market Risk Management defines and implements a framework to systematically identify, assess, monitor and report our
market risk. Market risk managers identify market risks through active portfolio analysis and engagement with the business
units.


Market Risk measurement
We aim to accurately measure all types of market risks by a comprehensive set of risk metrics embedding accounting,
economic and regulatory considerations.

We measure market risks by several internally developed key risk metrics and regulatory defined market risk approaches.


Trading Market Risk
Our primary mechanism to manage trading market risk is the application of our risk appetite framework of which the limit
framework is a key component. Our Management Board, supported by Market Risk Management, sets group-wide value-at-
risk, economic capital and portfolio stress testing limits for market risk in the trading book. Market Risk Management allocates
this overall appetite to our Corporate Divisions and their individual business units based on established and agreed business
plans. We also have business aligned heads within Market Risk Management who establish business unit limits, by allocating
the limit down to individual portfolios, geographical regions and types of market risks.

Value-at-risk, economic capital and portfolio stress testing limits are used for managing all types of market risk at an overall
portfolio level. As an additional and important complementary tool for managing certain portfolios or risk types, Market Risk
Management performs risk analysis and business specific stress testing. Limits are also set on sensitivity and
concentration/liquidity, exposure, business-level stress testing and event risk scenarios, taking into consideration business
plans and the risk vs return assessment.

Business units are responsible for adhering to the limits against which exposures are monitored and reported. The market risk
limits set by Market Risk Management are monitored on a daily, weekly and monthly basis, dependent on the risk management
tool being used.




                                                                                                                             98
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Market Risk Management




Internally developed Market Risk Models
Value-at-Risk (VaR)

VaR is a quantitative measure of the potential loss (in value) of Fair Value positions due to market movements that should not
be exceeded in a defined period of time and with a defined confidence level.

Our value-at-risk for the trading businesses is based on our own internal model. In October 1998, the German Banking
Supervisory Authority (now the BaFin) approved our internal model for calculating the regulatory market risk capital for our
general and specific market risks based on a sensitivity based Monte Carlo approach. In October 2020, the ECB approved a
significant change to our VaR model, now a Historical Simulation approach predominantly utilizing full revaluation, although
some portfolios remain on a sensitivity based approach. The new approach is used for both Risk Management and capital
requirements.

The new approach provides more accurate modelling of our risks, enhances our analysis capabilities and provides a more
effective tool for risk management. Aside from enabling a more accurate view of market risk, the implementation of Historical
Simulation VaR has brought about an even closer alignment of our market risk systems and models to our end of day pricing.

Risk management VaR is calibrated to a 99 % confidence level and a one day holding period. This means we estimate there
is a 1 in 100 chance that a mark-to-market loss from our trading positions will be at least as large as the reported VaR. For
regulatory capital purposes, our VaR model is calibrated to a 99 % confidence interval and a ten day holding period.

The calculation employs a Historical Simulation technique that uses one year of historical market data as input and observed
correlations between the risk factors during this one year period.

Our VaR model is designed to take into account a comprehensive set of risk factors across all asset classes. Key risk factors
are swap/government curves, index and issuer-specific credit curves, single equity and index prices, foreign exchange rates,
commodity prices as well as their implied volatilities. To help ensure completeness in the risk coverage, second order risk
factors, e.g. money market basis, implied dividends, option-adjusted spreads and precious metals lease rates are also
considered in the VaR calculation. The list of risk factors include in the VaR model is reviewed regularly and enhanced as part
of ongoing model performance reviews.

The model incorporates both linear and, especially for derivatives, nonlinear impacts predominantly through a full revaluation
approach but it also utilizes a sensitivity-based approach for certain portfolios. The full revaluation approach uses the historical
changes to risk factors as input to pricing functions. Whilst this approach is computationally expensive, it does yield a more
accurate view of market risk for nonlinear positions, especially under stressed scenarios. The sensitivity based approach uses
sensitivities to underlying risk factors in combination with historical changes to those risk factors.

For each business unit a separate VaR is calculated for each risk type, e.g. interest rate risk, credit spread risk, equity risk,
foreign exchange risk and commodity risk. “Diversification effect” reflects the fact that the total VaR on a given day will be
lower than the sum of the VaR relating to the individual risk types. Simply adding the VaR figures of the individual risk types
to arrive at an aggregate VaR would imply the assumption that the losses in all risk types occur simultaneously.

The VaR enables us to apply a consistent measure across our fair value exposures. It allows a comparison of risk in different
businesses, and also provides a means of aggregating and netting positions within a portfolio to reflect correlations and offsets
between different asset classes. Furthermore, it facilitates comparisons of our market risk both over time and against our daily
trading results.

When using VaR results a number of considerations should be taken into account. These include:

– The use of historical market data may not be a good indicator of potential future events, particularly those that are extreme
  in nature. This “backward-looking” limitation can cause VaR to understate future potential losses (as in 2008), but can also
  cause it to be overstated immediately following a period of significant stress (as in COVID-19 pandemic).
– The one day holding period does not fully capture the market risk arising during periods of illiquidity, when positions cannot
  be closed out or hedged within one day.
– VaR does not indicate the potential loss beyond the 99 th quantile.
– Intra-day risk is not reflected in the end of day VaR calculation.
– There may be risks in the trading or banking book that are not fully captured in the VaR model (either partially captured or
  missing entirely).




                                                                                                                                 99
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Market Risk Management




Our process of systematically capturing and evaluating risks currently not captured in our VaR model has been further
developed and improved. An assessment is made to determine the level of materiality of these risks and material risks are
prioritized for inclusion in our internal model. Risks not in VaR are monitored and assessed on a regular basis through our
Risk Not In VaR (RNIV) framework. This framework has also undergone a significant overhaul in 2020. This includes aligning
the methodologies with the Historical Simulation approach which in turn yields a more accurate estimate of the contribution of
these missing items and their potential capitalization.

We are committed to the ongoing development of our internal risk models, and we allocate substantial resources to reviewing,
validating and improving them.

Stressed Value-at-Risk

Stressed Value-at-Risk (SVaR) calculates a stressed value-at-risk measure based on a one year period of significant market
stress. We calculate a stressed value-at-risk measure using a 99 % confidence level. Stressed VaR is calculated with a holding
period of ten days. Our SVaR calculation utilizes the same systems, trade information and processes as those used for the
calculation of value-at-risk. The only difference is that historical market data and observed correlations from a period of
significant financial stress (i.e., characterized by high volatilities) is used as an input for the Historical Simulation.

The stress period selection process for the stressed value-at-risk calculation is based on the comparison of VaR calculated
using historical time windows compared to the current SVaR. If a historical window produces a VaR which is higher than the
current SVaR, it is further investigated and the SVaR window can then subsequently be updated accordingly. This process
runs on a quarterly basis.

During 2021, the stress period selection process for DB Group was conducted as outlined above. As a result, the SVaR
window used at various periods in 2021 included the Financial credit crisis of 2008/09, the European sovereign crisis of
2011/12 and the more recent COVID-19 stress period of 2020.

Incremental Risk Charge

Incremental Risk Charge captures default and credit rating migration risks for credit-sensitive positions in the trading book.
We use a Monte Carlo Simulation for calculating incremental risk charge as the 99.9 % quantile of the portfolio loss distribution
over a one-year capital horizon under a constant position approach and for allocating contributory incremental risk charge to
individual positions.

The model captures the default and migration risk in an accurate and consistent quantitative approach for all portfolios.
Important parameters for the incremental risk charge calculation are exposures, recovery rates, maturities, ratings with
corresponding default and migration probabilities and parameters specifying issuer correlations.


Market Risk Standardized Approach
The Market Risk Standardized Approach (“MRSA”) is used to determine the regulatory capital charge for the specific market
risk of trading book securitizations, for certain types of investment funds and for longevity risk as set out in CRR/CRD
regulations.

Longevity risk is the risk of adverse changes in life expectancies resulting in a loss in value on longevity linked policies and
transactions. For risk management purposes, stress testing and economic capital allocations are also used to monitor and
manage longevity risk.


Market Risk Stress Testing
Stress testing is a key risk management technique, which evaluates the potential effects of extreme market events and
movements in individual risk factors. It is one of the core quantitative tools used to assess the market risk of Deutsche Bank’s
positions and complements VaR and Economic Capital. Market Risk Management performs several types of stress testing to
capture the variety of risks (Portfolio Stress Testing, individual specific stress tests and Event Risk Scenarios) and also
contributes to Group-wide stress testing. These stress tests cover a wide range of severities designed to test the earnings
stability and capital adequacy of the bank.




                                                                                                                            100
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Market Risk Management




Trading Market Risk Economic Capital (TMR EC)
Our trading market risk economic capital model-scaled Stressed VaR based EC (SVaR based EC) - comprises two core
components, the “common risk” component covering risk drivers across all businesses and the “business-specific risk”
component, which enriches the Common Risk via a suite of Business Specific Stress Tests (BSSTs). Both components are
calibrated to historically observed severe market shocks. Common risk is calculated using a scaled version of the SVaR
framework while BSSTs are designed to capture more product/business-related bespoke risks (e.g. complex basis risks) as
well as higher order risks not captured in the common risk component. The SVaR based EC uses the Monte Carlo SVaR
framework.


Traded Default Risk Economic Capital (TDR EC)
TDR EC captures the relevant credit exposures across our trading and fair value banking books. Trading book exposures are
monitored by MRM via single name concentration and portfolio thresholds which are set based upon rating, size and liquidity.
Single name concentration risk thresholds are set for two key metrics: Default Exposure, i.e., the P&L impact of an
instantaneous default at the current recovery rate (RR), and bond equivalent Market Value (MV), i.e. default exposure at 0 %
recovery. In order to capture diversification and concentration effects we perform a joint calculation for traded default risk
economic capital and credit risk economic capital. Important parameters for the calculation of traded default risk are exposures,
recovery rates and default probabilities as well as maturities. The probability of joint rating downgrades and defaults is
determined by the default and rating correlations of the portfolio model. These correlations are specified through systematic
factors that represent countries, geographical regions and industries.


Trading Market Risk Reporting
Market Risk Management reporting creates transparency on the risk profile and facilitates the understanding of core market
risk drivers to all levels of the organization. The Management Board and Senior Governance Committees receive regular
reporting, as well as ad hoc reporting as required, on market risk, regulatory capital and stress testing. Senior Risk Committees
receive risk information at a number of frequencies, including weekly or monthly.

Additionally, Market Risk Management produces daily and weekly Market Risk specific reports and daily limit utilization reports
for each business owner.


Regulatory prudent valuation of assets carried at fair value
Pursuant to Article 34 CRR, institutions shall apply the prudent valuation requirements of Article 105 CRR to all assets
measured at fair value and shall deduct from CET 1 capital the amount of any additional value adjustments necessary.

We determined the amount of the additional value adjustments based on the methodology defined in the Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/101.

As of December 31, 2021 the amount of the additional value adjustments was € 1.8 billion. The December 31, 2020 amount
was € 1.4 billion. The increase was predominantly due to the diversification benefit factor reverting back to normal levels after
the amendment via Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/866 that provided temporary relief to account for the
extreme market volatility due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

As of December 31, 2021 the reduction of the expected loss from subtracting the additional value adjustments was € 117
million, which partly mitigated the negative impact of the additional value adjustments on our CET 1 capital.




                                                                                                                            101
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Market Risk Management




Nontrading Market Risk
Nontrading market risk arises primarily from activities outside of our trading units, in our banking book, and from certain o ff-
balance sheet items, embedding considerations of different accounting treatments of transactions. Significant market risk
factors the Group is exposed to and are overseen by risk management groups in that area are:

– Interest rate risk (including risk from embedded optionality and changes in behavioral patterns for certain product types),
  credit spread risk, foreign exchange risk, equity risk (including investments in public and private equity as well as real
  estate, infrastructure and fund assets).
– Market risks from off-balance sheet items, such as pension schemes and guarantees, as well as structural foreign exchange
  risk and equity compensation risk.

As for trading market risks our risk appetite and limit framework is also applied to manage our exposure to nontrading market
risk. On group level those are captured by the management board set limits for market risk economic capital capturing
exposures to all market risks across asset classes as well as earnings and economic value based limits for interest rate risk
in the banking books. Those limits are cascaded down by market risk management to the divisional or portfolio level. The limit
framework for nontrading market risk exposure is further complemented by a set of business specific stress tests, value -at-
risk & sensitivity limits monitored on a daily or monthly basis dependent on the risk measure being used.

Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book

Interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) is the current or prospective risk, to both the Group's capital and earnings,
arising from movements in interest rates, which affect the Group's banking book exposures. This includes gap risk, which
arises from the term structure of banking book instruments, basis risk, which describes the impact of relative changes in
interest rates for financial instruments that are priced using different interest rate curves, as well as option risk, which arises
from option derivative positions or from optional elements embedded in financial instruments.

The Group manages its IRRBB exposures using economic value as well as earnings based measures. Our Group Treasury
function is mandated to manage the interest rate risk centrally, with Market Risk Management acting as 2nd Line of Defense
(“2nd LoD”) independently assessing and challenging the implementation of the framework and adherence to the risk
appetite. Group Audit in its role as the 3rd Line of Defense (“3rd LoD”) is accountable for providing independent and
objective assurance on the adequacy of the design, operating effectiveness and efficiency of the risk management system
and systems of internal control. The Group Asset & Liability Committee (“ALCo”) oversees and steers the Group’s structural
interest risk position with particular focus on banking book risks and the management of the net interest income. The ALCo
monitors the sensitivity of financial resources and associated metrics to key market parameters such as interest rate curves
and oversees adherence to divisional/business financial resource limits.

Economic value based measures look at the change in economic value of banking book assets, liabilities and off-balance
sheet exposures resulting from interest rate movements, independent of the accounting treatment. Thereby the Group
measures the change in Economic Value of Equity (∆EVE) as the maximum decrease of the banking book economic value
under the six standard scenarios defined by the European Banking Authority (EBA) in addition to internal stress scenarios for
risk steering purposes. For the reporting of internal stress scenarios and risk appetite the Group applies a few different
modelling assumptions as used in this disclosure. When aggregating ∆EVE across different currencies DB adds up negative
and positive changes to EVE without applying weight factors for positive changes. Furthermore, the Group is using behavioral
model assumptions about the interest rate duration of own equity capital as well as non-maturity deposits from financial
institutions.

Earnings-based measures look at the expected change in Net Interest Income (NII) resulting from interest rate movements
over a defined time horizon, compared to a defined benchmark scenario. Thereby the Group measures ∆NII as the maximum
reduction in NII under the six standard scenarios defined by the European Banking Authority (EBA) in addition to internal
stress scenarios for risk steering purposes, compared to a market implied curve scenario, over a period of 12 months.

The Group employs mitigation techniques to hedge the interest rate risk arising from nontrading positions within given limits .
The interest rate risk arising from nontrading asset and liability positions is managed through Treasury Markets & Investments.
The residual interest rate risk positions are hedged with Deutsche Bank’s trading books within the IB division. Thereby the
Group uses derivatives and applies different hedge accounting techniques such as fair value hedge accounting or cash flow
hedge accounting. For fair value hedges, the Group uses interest rate swaps and options contracts to manage the fair value
movements of fixed rate financial instruments due to changes in benchmark interest. For hedges in the context of the Cash
Flow Hedge accounting , we do use interest rate swaps to manage the exposure to cash flow variability of our variable rate
instruments as a result of changes in benchmark interest rates.




                                                                                                                              102
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Market Risk Management




The Group assesses and measures hedge effectiveness of a hedging relationship based on the change in the fair value or
cash flows of the derivative hedging instrument relative to the change in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged item
attributable to the hedged risk.

The “Model Risk Management” function performs independent validation of models used for IRRBB measurement, as per all
market risk models, in line with Deutsche Bank’s group-wide risk governance framework.

The calculation of VaR and sensitivities of interest rate risk is performed daily, whereas the measurement and reporting of
economic value interest rate and earnings risk is performed on a monthly basis. The Group generally uses the same metrics
in its internal management systems as it applies for the disclosure in this report.

Deutsche Bank’s key modelling assumptions are applied to the positions in our PB and CB divisions. Those positions are
subject to risk of changes in our client’s behavior with regard to their deposits as well as loan products.

The Group manages the interest rate risk exposure of its Non-Maturity Deposits (NMDs) through a replicating portfolio
approach to determine the average repricing maturity of the portfolio. For the purpose of constructing the replicating portfolio,
the portfolio of NMDs is clustered by dimensions such as business unit, currency, product and geographical location. The
main dimensions influencing the repricing maturity are elasticity of deposit rates to market interest rates, volatility of deposit
balances and observable client behavior. For the reporting period the average repricing maturity assigned across all such
replicating portfolios is 2.17 years and Deutsche Bank uses 15 years as the longest repricing maturity.

In the loan and some of the term deposit products Deutsche Bank considers early prepayment/withdrawal behavior of its
customers. The parameters are based on historical observations, statistical analyses and expert assessments.

Furthermore, the Group generally calculates IRRBB related metrics in contractual currencies and aggregates the resulting
metrics for reporting purposes. When calculating economic value based metrics the commercial margin is excluded for
material parts of the balance sheet.

Credit Spread Risk in the Banking Book
Deutsche Bank is exposed to credit spread risk of bonds held in the banking book, mainly as part of the Treasury Liquidity
Reserves portfolio. The credit spread risk in the banking book is managed by the businesses, with Market Risk Management
acting as an independent oversight function ensuring that the exposure is within the approved risk appetite. This risk category
is closely associated with interest rate risk in the banking book as changes in the perceived credit quality of individual
instruments may result in fluctuations in spreads relative to underlying interest rates. The calculation of credit spread
sensitivities and value-at-risk for credit spread exposure is in general performed on a daily basis, the measurement and
reporting of economic capital and stress tests are performed on a monthly basis.

Foreign exchange risk

Foreign exchange risk arises from our nontrading asset and liability positions that are denominated in currencies other than
the functional currency of the respective entity. The majority of this foreign exchange risk is transferred through internal hedges
to trading books within the Investment Bank and is therefore reflected and managed via the value-at-risk figures in the trading
books. The remaining foreign exchange risks that have not been transferred are mitigated through match funding the
investment in the same currency, so that only residual risk remains in the portfolios. Small exceptions to above approach
follow the general Market Risk Management monitoring and reporting process, as outlined for the trading portfolio.

The bulk of nontrading open foreign exchange risk arises from the foreign exchange translation of local capital into the
reporting currency of DB Group and related capital hedge positions. Thereby structural open long positions are taken for a
selected number of relevant currencies to immunize the sensitivity of the capital ratio of the Group against changes in the
exchange rates.

Equity and investment risk

Nontrading equity risk is arising predominantly from our non-consolidated investment holdings in the banking book and from
our equity compensation plans.

Our non-consolidated equity investment holdings in the banking book are categorized into strategic and alternative investment
assets. Strategic investments typically relate to acquisitions made to support our business franchise and are undertaken with
a medium to long-term investment horizon. Alternative assets are comprised of principal investments and other non-strategic
investment assets. Principal investments are direct investments in private equity, real estate, venture capital, hedge or mutual
funds whereas assets recovered in the workout of distressed positions or other legacy investment assets in private equity and
real estate are of a non-strategic nature.


                                                                                                                              103
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                 Operational risk management




Investment proposals for strategic investments as well as monitoring of progress and performance against committed targets
are evaluated by the Group Investment Committee. Depending on size, strategic investments may require approval from the
Group Investment Committee, the Management Board or the Supervisory Board.

CRM Principal Investments is responsible for the risk-related governance and monitoring of our alternative asset activities.
The review of new or increased principal investment commitments is the task of the Principal Investment Commitment
Approval Group (PICAG), established by the Enterprise Risk Committee (ERC) as a risk management forum for alternative
asset investments. The PICAG approves investments under its authority or recommends decisions above its authority to the
Management Board for approval. The Management Board also sets investment limits for business divisions and various
portfolios of risk upon recommendation by the ERC.

The equity investment holdings are included in regular group wide stress tests and the monthly market risk economic capital
calculations.

Pension risk

The Group is exposed to market risks from defined benefit pension schemes for past and current employees. Market risks in
pension plans materialize due to a potential decline in the market value of plan assets or an increase in the present value of
the pension liability of each of the pension plans. Market Risk Management is responsible for a regular measurement,
monitoring, reporting and control of market risks of the asset and liability side of the defined benefit pension plans. There by,
market risks in pension plans include but are not restricted to interest rate risk, inflation risk, credit spread risk, equity risk, and
longevity risk. For further details on the Group’s defined benefit pension obligations and their management, we refer to Note
33 “Employee Benefits” in the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” section.

Other risks in the Banking Book

Market risks in our Asset Management business primarily result from principal guaranteed funds or accounts, but also from
co-investments in our funds.


Nontrading Market Risk Economic Capital
Nontrading market risk economic capital is calculated either by applying the standard traded market risk EC methodology or
through the use of non-traded market risk models that are specific to each risk class and which consider, among other factors,
historically observed market moves, the liquidity of each asset class, and changes in client’s behavior in relation to products
with behavioral optionalities.



Operational risk management
Operational risk management framework
Deutsche Bank applies the European Banking Authority’s Single Rulebook definition of operational risk: “Operational risk
means the risk of losses stemming from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events.
Operational risk includes legal risks but excludes business and reputational risk and is embedded in all banking products and
activities.” Operational risk forms a subset of the bank’s non-financial risks (NFR).

Deutsche Bank’s operational risk appetite sets out the amount of operational risk we are willing to accept as a consequence
of doing business. We take on operational risks consciously, both strategically as well as in day-to-day business. While the
bank may have no appetite for certain types of operational risk events (such as violations of laws or regulations and
misconduct), in other cases a certain amount of operational risk must be accepted if the bank is to achieve its business
objectives. In case a residual risk is assessed to be outside our risk appetite, risk reducing actions must be undertaken,
including remediating the risks, insuring risks or ceasing business.

The Operational risk management framework (ORMF) is a set of interrelated tools and processes that are used to identify,
assess, measure, monitor and mitigate the bank’s operational risks. Its components have been designed to operate together
to provide a comprehensive, risk-based approach to managing the bank’s most material operational risks. ORMF components
include the Group’s approach to setting and adhering to operational risk appetite, the operational risk type and control
taxonomies, the minimum standards for operational risk management processes including the respective tools, and the bank’s
operational risk capital model.




                                                                                                                                   104
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Operational risk management




Organizational & governance structure
While the day-to-day management of operational risk is the primary responsibility of our business divisions and infrastructure
functions, where these risks are generated, Non-Financial Risk Management (NFRM) oversees the Group-wide management
of operational risks, identifies and reports risk concentrations, and promotes a consistent application of the ORMF across the
bank. NFRM is part of the Group risk function, the Chief Risk Office, which is headed by the Chief Risk Officer.

The Chief Risk Officer appoints the Head of NFRM, who is accountable for the design, oversight and maintenance of an
effective, efficient and regulatory compliant ORMF, including the operational risk capital model. The Head of NFRM monitors
and challenges the ORMF’s Group wide implementation and monitors overall risk levels against the bank’s operational risk
appetite.

The Non-Financial Risk Committee (NFRC), which is chaired by the Chief Risk Officer, is responsible for the oversight,
governance and coordination of the management of operational risk in the Group on behalf of the Management Board, by
establishing a cross-risk perspective of the key operational risks of the Group. Its decision-making authorities include the
review, advice and management of all operational risk issues that may impact the risk profile of our business divisions and
infrastructure functions. Several sub-fora with attendees from both the 1st and 2nd LoDs support the NFRC to effectively fulfil
its mandate. In addition to the Group level NFRC, business divisions have established 1st LoD NFR fora for the oversight and
management of operational risks on various levels of the organization.

The governance of our operational risks follows the bank’s Three Lines of Defence (3LoD) approach to managing all of its
financial and non-financial risks. The ORMF establishes the operational risk governance standards including the core 1st and
2nd LoD roles and their responsibilities, to ensure effective risk management and appropriate independent challenge.

Operational risk requirements for the first line of defense (1st LoD): Risk owners as the 1st LoD have full accountability for
their operational risks and manage these against a defined risk specific appetite.

Operational risk owners are those roles in the bank whose activities generate - or who are exposed to - operational risks. As
heads of business divisions and infrastructure functions, they must determine the appropriate organizational structure to
identify their operational risk profile, actively manage these risks within their organization, take business decisions on the
mitigation or acceptance of operational risks to ensure they remain within risk appetite, and establish and maintain 1st LoD
controls.

Operational risk requirements for the second line of defense (2nd LoD): Risk Type Controllers (RTCs) act as the 2nd LoD
control functions for all sub-risk types under the overarching risk type “operational risk”.

RTCs establish the framework and define Group level risk appetite statements for the specific operational risk type they
oversee. RTCs define the minimum risk management and control standards and independently monitor and challenge risk
owners’ implementation of these standards in their day-to-day processes, as well as their risk-taking and risk management
activities. RTCs provide independent operational risk oversight and prepare aggregated risk type profile reporting. RTCs
monitor the risk type’s profile against risk appetite and have a right to veto risk decisions leading to foreseeable risk appetite
breaches. As risk type experts, RTCs define the risk type and its taxonomy and support and facilitate the implementation of
the risk type framework in the 1st LoD. To maintain their independence, RTC roles are located only in infrastructure functions.

Operational risk requirements for NFRM as the RTC for the overarching risk type operational risk: As the RTC / risk control
function for operational risk, NFRM establishes and maintains the overarching ORMF and determines the appropriate level of
capital to underpin the Group’s operational risk.

– As the 2nd LoD risk control function, NFRM defines the bank’s approach to operational risk appetite and monitors its
  adherence, breaches and consequences. NFRM is the independent reviewer and challenger of the 1st LoD’s risk and
  control assessments and risk management activities relating to the holistic operational risk profile of a unit (while RTCs
  monitor and challenge activities related to their specific risk types). NFRM provides the oversight of risk and control
  mitigation plans to return the bank’s operational risk to its risk appetite, where required. It also establishes and regularly
  reports the bank’s operational risk profile and operational top risks, i.e. the bank’s material operational risks which are
  outside of risk appetite.
– As the subject matter expert for operational risk, NFRM provides independent risk views to facilitate forward-looking
  management of operational risks, actively engages with risk owners (1st LoD) and facilitates the implementation of risk
  management and control standards across the bank.
– NFRM is accountable for the design, implementation and maintenance of the approach to determine the adequate level of
  capital required for operational risk, for recommendation to the Management Board. This includes the calculation and
  allocation of operational risk capital demand and expected loss under the Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA).




                                                                                                                             105
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Operational risk management




Managing our operational risk
In order to manage the broad range of sub-risk types underlying operational risk, the ORMF provides a set of tools and
processes that apply to all operational risk types across the bank. These enable us to determine our operational risk profile in
relation to our risk appetite for operational risk, to systematically identify operational risk themes and concentrations, and to
define risk mitigating measures and priorities.

In 2021, we continued to mature the management of operational risks by further integrating and simplifying our risk
management processes, by enhancing the bank’s central controls inventory, and by strengthening our control activities
conducted by both 1st LoD and 2nd LoD functions at various levels across the bank.

Loss data collection:. We collect, categorize and analyze data on internal and relevant external operational risk events (with
a P&L impact ≥ €10,000) in a timely manner. Material operational risk events trigger clearly defined lessons learned and read-
across analyses, which are performed in the 1st LoD in close collaboration between business partners, risk control and other
infrastructure functions. Lessons learned reviews analyze the reasons for significant operational risk events, identify their root
causes, and document appropriate remediation actions to reduce the likelihood of their reoccurrence. Read across reviews
take the conclusions of the lessons learned process and seek to analyze whether similar risks and control weaknesses
identified in a lessons learned review exist in other areas of the bank, even if they have not yet resulted in problems. This
allows preventative actions to be undertaken. In 2021, we continued work on the multiyear initiative to implement a performant
and modular event management platform. During phase 1 we continue to work on optimizing the user experience and
convenience of the platform.

Scenario analysis. We complement existing risk insights through the use of exploratory scenario analysis. The source of our
scenario storylines and trigger for their completion builds on internal losses, Emerging Risk reviews, Top Risk concentrations,
and the review of external peer OR Loss Events. We thereby systematically utilize information from actual and potential future
loss events to identify thematic susceptibilities and actively seek to reduce the likelihood of similar incidents, for example
through deep dive analyses or risk profile reviews and Control Assurance planning. In 2021, we enhanced our approach,
tightened roles and responsibilities, and through integrating the process more directly into day-to-day risk management
activities. Scenario analysis continues to play an important role in assessing longer term potential impacts of COVID-19,
Conduct, and ESG risk themes.

Risk & Control Assessment: The Risk & Control Assessment process (RCA) comprises of a series of bottom-up assessments
of the risks generated by business divisions and infrastructure functions (1st LoDs), the effectiveness of the controls in place
to manage them, and the remediation actions required to bring the risks outside of risk appetite back into risk appetite. This
enables both the 1st and 2nd LoDs to have a clear view of the bank’s material operational risks. In 2021, we focused on
embedding the dynamic, trigger based approach to the RCA to review our risk profile on a real time basis through NFR
governance meetings. We continued to mature in the area of controls by refining the bank’s central control inventory and
increasing control assurance activities conducted across both 1st LoD and 2nd LoD functions at various levels of the bank.
The outcome provided greater transparency to Risk Owners on the control environment the bank relies upon to mitigate its
operational risks.

Top Risks: We regularly report and perform analyses on our top risks to establish that they are appropriately mitigated. As all
risks, top risks are rated in terms of both the likelihood that they could occur and the impact on the bank should they do so,
and through this assessment they are identified to be particularly material for the bank. The reporting provides a forward-
looking perspective on the impact of planned remediation and control enhancements. It also contains emerging risks and
themes that have the potential to evolve as top risks in the future. Top risk reduction programs comprise the most significant
risk reduction activities that are key to bringing our operational top risk themes back within risk appetite. In 2021, we fostered
greater connectivity between Top Risks and the more granular RCA outputs through enhanced tooling and by improving
aggregation logic to better identify Top risks from the bottom-up RCA process.

Transformation Risk Assessment: To appropriately identify and manage risks from material change initiatives within the bank,
a Transformation Risk Assessment (TRA) process is in place to assess the impact of transformations on the bank’s risk profile
and control environment. This process considers impacts to both financial and non-financial risk types and is applicable to
initiatives including regulatory initiatives, technology migrations, risk remediation projects, strategy changes, organizational
changes, and real estate moves within the bank. In 2021, the Operational Resilience dimension was formalized by mandating
that Operational Resilience impacts due to potential changes to process, control or underlying resource base from the initiative
are taken into account during the transformation risk assessment.




                                                                                                                             106
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Operational risk management




NFR appetite metrics: NFR appetite is the amount of non-financial risk the bank is willing to accept as a consequence of doing
business. The NFR appetite framework provides a common approach to measure and monitor the level of risk appetite across
the firm. NFR appetite metrics are used to monitor the operational risk profile against the bank’s defined risk appetite, and to
alert the organization to impending problems in a timely fashion. In 2021, to further inform the quality of risk appetite metrics
used to assess NFR appetite and capital processes, a metric quality assessment has been introduced.

Findings and issue management: The findings and issue management process allows the bank to mitigate the risks associated
with known control weaknesses and deficiencies, and enables management to make risk-based decisions over the need for
further remediation or risk acceptance. Outputs from the findings management process must be able to demonstrate to internal
and external stakeholders that the bank is actively identifying its control weaknesses, and taking steps to manage associated
risks within acceptable levels of risk appetite. In 2021, we enhanced our ability to identify deficiency and gap control themes.
The criteria for Risk Acceptance have been tightened along with those for other lifecycle events. These measures will continue
to focus attention on sustainable remediation across the organization and improved control environment outcomes.


Operational risk type frameworks
The ORMF provides the overarching set of standards, tools and processes that apply to the management of all operational
sub-risk types. It is complemented by the operational risk type frameworks, risk management and control standards and tools
set up by the respective RTCs for the operational sub-risk types they control. These operational sub-risk types are controlled
by various infrastructure functions and include the following:

– The Compliance department performs an independent 2nd level control function that protects the bank’s license to operate
  by promoting and enforcing compliance with the law and driving a culture of compliance and ethical conduct in the bank.
  The Compliance department assists the business divisions and works with other infrastructure functions and regulators to
  establish and maintain a risk-based approach to the management of the bank’s compliance risks in accordance with the
  bank’s risk appetite and to help the bank detect, mitigate and prevent breaches of laws and regulations. The Compliance
  department performs the following principal activities: the identification, assessment, mitigation, monitoring and reporting
  on compliance risk; performs second level controls and testing; assists Regulatory Affairs with regulatory engagement and
  management and acts as a trusted advisor. The results of these assessments and controls are regularly reported to the
  Management Board and Supervisory Board.
– Financial crime risks are managed by our Anti-Financial Crime (AFC) function via maintenance and development of a
  dedicated program. The AFC program is based on regulatory and supervisory requirements. AFC has defined roles and
  responsibilities and established dedicated functions for the identification and management of financial crime risks resulting
  from money laundering, terrorism financing, non-compliance with sanctions and embargoes, the facilitation of tax evasion
  as well as other criminal activities including fraud, bribery and corruption and other crimes. AFC updates its strategy for
  financial crime prevention via regular development of internal policies processes and controls, institution-specific risk
  assessment and staff training.
– The Legal Department (including Group Governance and Group Data Privacy) is an independent infrastructure function
  mandated to provide legal advice to the Management Board, the Supervisory Board (to the extent it does not give rise to
  conflict of interest), business divisions and infrastructure functions, and to support the Management Board in setting up
  and guarding the Group’s governance and control frameworks in respect of the bank’s legal, internal corporate governance
  and data privacy risks. This includes in particular, but is not limited to:
  – Advising the Management Board and Supervisory Board on legal aspects of their activities
  – Providing legal advice to all Deutsche Bank units to facilitate adherence to legal and regulatory requirements in relation
     to their activities respectively, including to support their interactions with regulatory authorities
  – Engaging and managing external lawyers used by Deutsche Bank Group
  – Managing Deutsche Bank Group’s litigation and contentious regulatory matters, (including contentious HR matters), and
     managing Deutsche Bank Group’s response to external regulatory enforcement investigations
  – Advising on legal aspects of internal investigations
  – Setting the global governance framework for Deutsche Bank Group, facilitating its cross-unit application and assessing
     its implementation
  – Developing and safeguarding efficient corporate governance structures suitable to support efficient decision-making, to
     align risk and accountability based on clear and consistent roles and responsibilities
  – Maintaining Deutsche Bank Group’s framework for policies, procedures and framework documents and acting as
     guardian for Group policies and procedures as well as framework documents
  – Advising on data privacy laws, rules and regulation and maintaining DB Group´s data privacy risk and control framework
  – Ensuring appropriate quality assurance in relation to all of the above




                                                                                                                            107
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Operational risk management




– NFRM Product Governance oversees the New Product Approval (NPA) and Systematic Product Review (SPR) cross-risk
  processes forming a control framework designed to manage the risks associated with the implementation of new products
  and services, changes in products and services during their lifecycles and, the process by which they are systematically
  reviewed. Applicable bank-wide, the cross-risk processes cover different stages of the product lifecycle with NPA focusing
  on pre-implementation and SPR on post-implementation. Pre-implementation, the primary objective of the NPA process is
  to ensure proper assessment of all risks, both financial and non-financial, in NPA relevant products and services, as well
  as related processes and infrastructure. Post-implementation, the SPR process focuses on the periodic review of all
  products to determine if they are to remain live or need to be modified or withdrawn.
– NFRM is the RTC for a number of operational resilience risks. Its mandate includes second line oversight of controls over
  transaction processing activities, as well as infrastructure risks to prevent technology or process disruption, maintain the
  confidentiality, integrity and availability of data, records and information security, and ensure business divisions and
  infrastructure functions have robust plans in place to recover critical business processes and functions in the event of
  disruption including technical or building outage, or the effects of cyber-attack or natural disaster as well as any physical
  security or safety risk. NFRM RTC also manages the risks arising from the bank’s internal and external vendor
  engagements via the provision of a comprehensive third party risk management framework


Measuring our operational risks
We calculate and measure the regulatory and economic capital requirements for operational risk using the Advanced
Measurement Approach (AMA) methodology. Our AMA capital calculation is based upon the loss distribution approach. Gross
losses from historical internal and external loss data (Operational Riskdata eXchange Association consortium data) and
external scenarios from a public database (IBM OpData) complemented by internal scenario data are used to estimate the
risk profile (i.e., a loss frequency and a loss severity distribution). Our loss distribution approach model includes conservatism
by recognizing losses on events that arise over multiple years as single events in our historical loss profile.

Within the loss distribution approach model, the frequency and severity distributions are combined in a Monte Carlo simulation
to generate potential losses over a one year time horizon. Finally, the risk mitigating benefits of insurance are applied to each
loss generated in the Monte Carlo simulation. Correlation and diversification benefits are applied to the net losses in a manner
compatible with regulatory requirements to arrive at a net loss distribution at Group level, covering expected and unexpected
losses. Capital is then allocated to each of the business divisions after considering qualitative adjustments and expected loss.

The regulatory and economic capital requirements for operational risk are derived from the 99.9 % percentile; see the section
“Internal Capital Adequacy” for details. Both regulatory and economic capital requirements are calculated for a time horizon
of one year.

The regulatory and economic capital demand calculations are performed on a quarterly basis. NFRM establishes and
maintains the approach for capital demand quantification and ensures that appropriate development, validation and change
governance processes are in place, whereby the validation is performed by an independent validation function and in line with
the Group’s model risk management process.


Drivers for operational risk capital development
In 2021, our total operational risk losses increased by €172 million (43 %) year-on-year, predominantly driven by losses and
provisions arising from civil litigation and regulatory enforcement. Such losses still make up 89 % of operational risk losses,
accounting for the majority of operational risk regulatory and economic capital demand and are more heavily reliant on our
long-term loss history. Refer to section “Current Individual Proceedings”, Note 29 “Provisions”, for a description of our current
legal and regulatory proceedings and a summary of the consolidated financial statements. The operational risk losses from
civil litigation and regulatory enforcement increased by €225 million (44 %) while our non-legal operational risk losses
decreased by €53 million (46 %) compared to 2020 primarily as a result of COVID-19 related expenses not having been
repeated in 2021.

In view of the relevance of legal risks within our operational risk profile, we dedicate specific attention to the management and
measurement of our open civil litigation and regulatory enforcement matters where the Bank relies both on information from
internal as well as external data sources to consider developments in legal matters that affect the Bank specifically but also
the banking industry as a whole. Reflecting the multi-year nature of legal proceedings the measurement of these risks
furthermore takes into account changing levels of certainty by capturing the risks at various stages throughout the lifecycle of
a legal matter.

Conceptually, the Bank measures operational risk including legal risk by determining the maximum loss that will not be
exceeded with a given probability. This maximum loss amount includes a component that due to the IFRS criteria is reflected
in our financial statements and a component that is expressed as regulatory or economic capital demand beyond the amount
reflected as provisions within our financial statements.



                                                                                                                             108
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Liquidity Risk Management




The legal losses which the Bank expects with a likelihood of more than 50 % are already reflected in our IFRS group financial
statements. These losses include net changes in provisions for existing and new cases in a specific period where the loss is
deemed probable and is reliably measurable in accordance with IAS 37. The development of our legal provisions for civil
litigations and regulatory enforcement is outlined in detail in Note 29 “Provisions” to the consolidated financial statements.

Uncertain legal losses which are not reflected in our financial statements as provisions because they do not meet the
recognition criteria under IAS 37 are expressed as “regulatory or economic capital demand”.

To quantify the litigation losses in the AMA model, the bank takes into account historical losses, provisions, contingent liabilities
and legal forecasts. Legal forecasts are generally comprised of ranges of potential losses from legal matters that are not
deemed probable but are reasonably possible. Reasonably possible losses may result from ongoing and new legal matters
which are reviewed at least quarterly by the attorneys handling the legal matters.

We include the legal forecasts in the “relevant loss data” used in our AMA model. The projection range of the legal forecasts
is not restricted to the one year capital time horizon but goes beyond and conservatively assumes early settlement of the
underlying losses in the reporting period - thus considering the multi-year nature of legal matters.



Liquidity Risk Management
Liquidity risk arises from our potential inability to meet payment obligations when they come due or without incurring excessive
costs. The group liquidity risk management framework should ensure that the guidance and controls are established within
DB Group to fulfil its payment obligations at all times (including intraday) and can manage its liquidity and funding risks within
the MB approved Risk Appetite, when executing the Bank’s strategy. The framework considers relevant and significant drivers
of liquidity risk, whether on-balance sheet or off-balance sheet.


Liquidity Risk Management framework
The bank’s liquidity risk management principles are documented in the globally applicable “Liquidity Risk Management Policy”
(LRMP) and adheres to the 8 key risk management practices (Risk governance, Risk Organization (3 LoD), Risk Culture, Risk
Appetite and strategy, Risk Identification and assessment, Mitigation and controls, Risk measurement and reporting, Stress
planning and execution). All additional policies and procedures (both global and local) issued by the liquidity risk management
functions further define the requirements specific to liquidity risk practices. They are subordinate to this policy and subject to
the standards it sets forth. The liquidity managing functions are organized in alignment with the three lines of defense structure
set forth in the “Risk Management Policy – Deutsche Bank Group”. Lines of Business and Treasury comprise the first line of
defense (“1LoD”) –responsible for executing the steps needed to manage the Bank’s liquidity position. Risk comprises the
second line of defense (“2LoD”) – responsible for providing independent risk oversight, challenge, and validation of activities
conducted by the 1LoD including establishing the Risk Appetite and Group level control standards. Group Audit comprises the
third line of defense (“3LoD”) - responsible for overseeing the activities of both the 1LoD and 2LoD.The individual roles and
responsibilities within the Liquidity Risk Management Framework have been laid out and documented in the Global
Responsibility Matrix which was designed to provide clarity and transparency across all involved stakeholders.

In accordance with the ECB’s SREP (and revised ILAAP requirement issued in November 2018), Deutsche Bank has
implemented an Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process (ILAAP), which is reviewed at least annually and approved
by the Management Board. Liquidity Risk Management (LRM) undertakes ongoing oversight on activities conducted within
the mandate of Treasury Liquidity Management (TSY-LM) to most effectively manage the liquidity of the group and steer
business activities, while ensuring the bank’s Risk Appetite is adhered to. The ILAAP provides comprehensive documentation
and assessment of the Bank’s Liquidity Risk Management framework, which includes: identifying the key liquidity and funding
risks to which the Group is exposed; describing how these risks are identified, monitored and measured; and describing the
techniques and resources used to manage and mitigate these risks.

The Management Board defines        the liquidity and funding risk strategy for the Bank as well as the risk appetite, based on
recommendations made by the         Group Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) and Group Risk Committee (GRC). The
Management Board reviews and        approves the risk appetite at least annually. The risk appetite is applied to the Group and
Key Liquidity Entities (KLE) e.g.   DB AG to monitor and control liquidity risk as well as the Bank’s long-term funding and
issuance plan.

The Bank’s Liquidity Risk Appetite, which is defined through qualitative principles and supporting quantitative metrics, is laid
out in the “Risk Appetite Statement – DB Group” and is subject to the standards set in the “Risk Appetite Policy – DB Group”.
This Risk Appetite Statement is further underpinned by the Liquidity Risk Controls Framework consisting of Risk Appetite
Limits, as well as a suite of Non-Risk Appetite Limits, Thresholds and Early Warning Indicators (EWI) defined in the Liquidity
Risk Controls Policy.


                                                                                                                                109
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Liquidity Risk Management




Deutsche Bank has a dedicated Stress Testing and Risk Appetite Framework set by LRM, which ensures the Bank’s liquidity
position is balanced across the Group, its KLEs and across currencies.

Treasury manages liquidity and funding, in accordance with the Management Board-approved risk appetite across a range of
relevant metrics and implements a number of tools including business level limits, to ensure compliance. As such, Treasury
works closely with LRM and business divisions to identify, analyze and monitor underlying liquidity risk characteristics within
business portfolios. These parties are engaged in regular dialogue regarding changes in the Bank’s liquidity position arising
from business activities and market circumstances.

Furthermore, the Bank ensures at the level of each liquidity relevant entity that all local liquidity metrics are managed in
compliance with the defined risk appetite. Local liquidity surpluses are pooled in DB AG hubs and local liquidity shortfalls can
be met through support from DB AG hubs. Transfers of liquidity capacity between entities are subject to the approval
framework outlined in the “Intercompany Funding Policy” involving the Group’s liquidity steering function as well as the local
liquidity managers considering the LCR, NSFR (Pillar 1) and sNLP (Pillar 2), available surplus that resides in entities with
restriction to transfer liquidity to other group entities, for example due to regulatory lending requirements, is considered to be
trapped and as such not counted in the calculation of the consolidated group liquidity surplus.

The Management Board is informed about the Bank’s performance against the key liquidity metrics, including the Risk Appetite
and internal and market indicators, via a weekly Liquidity Dashboard. Liquidity & Treasury Reporting & Analysis (LTRA) has
overall accountability for the accurate and timely production of both external regulatory liquidity reporting and the internal
management reporting of liquidity risk for DB Group. In addition, LTRA is responsible for the development of management
information systems (MIS) and related analysis necessary for supporting the liquidity risk framework and its governance for
Treasury and LRM.

As part of the annual strategic planning process, Treasury projects the development of the key liquidity and funding metrics
including the USD currency exposure based on anticipated business activity to ensure that the strategic plan remains aligned
with the Bank’s Risk Appetite.

Deutsche Bank has a wide range of funding sources, including retail and institutional deposits, unsecured and secured
wholesale funding and debt issuance in the capital markets. Group ALCo is the Bank’s decisive governing body mandated by
the Management Board to optimize the sourcing and deployment of the Bank’s balance sheet and financial resources in line
with the Management Board risk appetite and strategy. As such, it has the overarching responsibility to define, approve and
optimize the Bank`s funding strategy.

Deutsche Bank’s Group Contingency Funding Plan (CFP) outlines how the bank would respond to an actual or anticipated
liquidity stress event. It includes a decisive set of actions that can be taken to raise cash and recover the bank’s key liquidity
metrics in times of liquidity stress. The CFP includes a clear governance structure and well-defined liquidity risk indicators to
ensure timely and effective decision-making, communication, and coordination during a liquidity stress event. Deutsche Bank
has established the Financial Resource Management Council (FRMC) which is responsible for oversight of capital and liquidity
across contingency, recovery, and resolution scenarios in a crisis situation.


Short-term liquidity and wholesale funding
Deutsche Bank tracks all contractual cash flows from wholesale funding sources on a daily basis, over a 12-month horizon.
For this purpose, the Bank considers wholesale funding to include unsecured liabilities largely raised by Treasury Markets
Pool, as well as secured liabilities primarily raised by the Investment Bank Division. Wholesale funding counterparties typically
include corporates, banks and other financial institutions, governments and sovereigns.

The Group has implemented a set of limits to restrict the Bank’s exposure to wholesale counterparties, which have historically
demonstrated the most susceptibility to market stress. The wholesale funding limits are monitored daily and apply to the total
combined currency amount of all wholesale funding currently outstanding, both secured and unsecured with specific tenor
limits. Liquidity Reserves constitute the primary mitigants against potential stress in the short-term.

The tables in the section “Liquidity Risk Exposure: Funding Diversification” show the contractual maturity of the Bank’s short-
term wholesale funding and capital markets issuance.




                                                                                                                             110
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Liquidity Risk Management




Liquidity stress testing and scenario analysis
Global internal liquidity stress testing and scenario analysis is used for measuring liquidity risk and evaluating the Group’s
short-term liquidity position within the liquidity framework. This complements the daily operational cash management process.
The long-term liquidity strategy based on contractual and behavioral modelled cash flow information is represented by a long-
term metric known as the Funding Matrix (refer to Funding Risk Management below).

The global liquidity stress testing process is managed by Treasury in accordance with the Management Board approved risk
appetite. Treasury is responsible for the design of the overall methodology, the choice of liquidity risk drivers and the
determination of appropriate assumptions (parameters) to translate input data into stress testing output. LRM is responsible
for the definition of the stress scenarios. Under the principles laid out by Model Risk Management, LRM performs the
independent validation of liquidity risk models and non-model estimates. LTRA is responsible for implementing these
methodologies and performing the stress test calculation in conjunction with Treasury, LRM and IT.

Stress testing and scenario analysis are used to evaluate the impact of sudden and severe stress events on the Group’s
liquidity position. Deutsche Bank has selected four scenarios to calculate the Group’s stressed Net Liquidity Position (“sNLP”).
These scenarios are designed to capture potential outcomes which may be experienced by Deutsche Bank during periods of
idiosyncratic and/or market-wide stress and are designed to be both plausible and sufficiently severe as to materially impact
the Group’s liquidity position. The most severe scenario assesses the potential consequences of a combined market-wide and
idiosyncratic stress event, including downgrades of our credit rating. Under each of the scenarios the impact of a liquidity
stress event over different time horizons and across multiple liquidity risk drivers, covering all business lines, product areas
and balance sheet is considered. The output from scenario analysis feeds the Group Wide Stress Test, which considers the
impact of scenarios on all risk stripes.

In addition, potential funding requirements from contingent liquidity risks which might arise under stress, including drawdowns
on credit facilities, increased collateral requirements under derivative agreements, and outflows from deposits with a
contractual rating linked trigger are included in the analysis. Subsequently Countermeasures, which are the actions the Group
would take to counterbalance the outflows incurred during a stress event, are taken into consideration. Those
countermeasures include utilizing the Bank’s Liquidity Reserve and generating liquidity from other unencumbered, marketable
assets without causing any material impact on the Bank’s business model.

Stress testing is conducted at a global level and for defined Key Liquidity Entities covering an eight-week stress horizon which
is considered the most critical time span during a liquidity crisis and, where, on a Group level, liquidity is actively steered and
assessed. In addition to the consolidated currency stress test, stress tests for material currencies (EUR, USD and GBP) are
performed. Ad-hoc analysis may be conducted to reflect the impact of potential downside events that could affect the Bank
such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Relevant stress assumptions are applied to reflect liquidity flows from risk drivers and on-
balance sheet and off-balance sheet products. The suite of stress testing scenarios and assumptions are reviewed on a
regular basis and are updated when enhancements are made to stress testing methodologies.

Complementing daily liquidity stress testing, the Bank also conducts regular Group Wide Stress Testing (GWST) run by
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) analyzing liquidity risks in conjunction with the other defined risk types and evaluating
their impact and interplay to both capital and liquidity positions as described in Risk and Capital Framework under Stress
Testing.

The tables in the section “Liquidity Risk Exposure: Stress Testing and Scenario Analysis” show the results of the internal
global liquidity stress test under the various scenarios.


Liquidity Coverage Ratio
In addition to the internal stress test results, the Group has a Management Board-approved risk appetite for the Liquidity
Coverage Ratio (LCR). The LCR is intended to promote the short-term resilience of a Bank’s liquidity risk profile over a 30-
day stress scenario. The ratio is defined as the amount of High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) that could be used to raise
liquidity in a stressed scenario, measured against the total volume of net cash outflows, arising from both contractual and
modelled exposures over a 30-day time horizon.

The LCR complements the internal stress testing framework. By maintaining a ratio in excess of the minimum regulatory
requirements, the LCR seeks to ensure that the Group holds adequate liquidity resources to mitigate a short-term liquidity
stress.




                                                                                                                              111
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Liquidity Risk Management




Key differences between the internal liquidity stress test and LCR include the time horizon (eight weeks versus 30 days), the
classification and haircut differences between Liquidity Reserves and the LCR HQLA, outflow rates for various categories of
funding, and inflow assumption for various assets (for example, loan repayments). The Group’s internal liquidity stress test
also includes outflows related to intraday liquidity assumptions, which are not explicitly reflected in the LCR.


Funding Risk Management
Deutsche Bank’s primary internal tool for monitoring and managing longer term funding risk is the Funding Matrix. The Funding
Matrix assesses the Group’s structural funding profile over a time horizon beyond one year. To produce the Funding Matrix,
all funding-relevant assets and liabilities are mapped into time buckets corresponding to their contractual or modeled
maturities. This allows the Group to identify expected excesses and shortfalls in term liabilities over assets in each time bucket,
facilitating the management of potential liquidity exposures.

The liquidity profile is based on contractual cash flow information. If the contractual maturity profile of a product does no t
adequately reflect the liquidity profile, it is replaced by modeling assumptions. Short-term balance sheet items (<1yr) or
matched funded structures (asset and liabilities directly matched with no liquidity risk) are excluded from the term analysis.

The bottom-up assessment by individual business line is combined with a top-down reconciliation against the Group’s IFRS
balance sheet. From the cumulative term profile of assets and liabilities beyond 1 year, long-funded surpluses or short-funded
gaps in the Group’s maturity structure can be identified. The cumulative profile is thereby built up starting from the greater
than 10-year bucket down to the greater than 1-year bucket.

The strategic liquidity planning process, which incorporates the development of funding supply and demand across business
units, together with the Bank’s targeted key liquidity and funding metrics, provides the key input parameter for our annual
capital markets issuance plan. Upon approval by the Management Board the capital markets issuance plan establishes
issuance targets for securities by tenor, volume, currency and instrument.


Net Stable Funding Ratio
The Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) is a regulatory metric for assessing a Bank’s structural funding profile. The NSFR is
intended to reduce medium to long-term funding risks by requiring banks to maintain a stable funding profile in relation to their
on- and off-balance sheet activities. The ratio is defined as the amount of Available Stable Funding (the portion of capital and
liabilities expected to be a stable source of funding), relative to the amount of Required Stable Funding (a function of the
liquidity characteristics of various assets held).

NFSR limits have been set for Group as well as for the entity Deutsche Bank AG to ensure compliance with this regulatory
requirement. As the NSFR has come into effect as of June 28, 2021, the Bank must now maintain the prescribed minimum
100 % ratio. NSFR risk appetite levels were treated as thresholds up to June 28, 2021 after which they became hard limits to
reflect the regulatory requirement.


Capital Markets Issuance
Debt issuance, encompassing senior unsecured bonds, covered bonds, and capital securities, is a key source of term funding
for the Bank and is managed directly by Treasury. At least once a year, following endorsement by ALCO, Treasury submits
an annual long-term Funding Plan to the GRC for recommendation and then to the Management Board for approval. This plan
is driven by global and local funding and liquidity requirements based on expected business development. The Group’s capital
markets issuance portfolio is dynamically managed through annual issuance plans to avoid excessive maturity concentrations.


Funding Diversification
Diversification of the Group’s funding profile in terms of investor types, regions and products is an important element of the
liquidity risk management framework. The Bank has minimum risk appetite levels for most stable funding sources stemming
from capital markets issuances and equity, as well as from retail, and transaction banking clients. Other customer deposits,
secured funding and short positions are additional sources of funding. Unsecured wholesale funding represents unsecured
wholesale liabilities sourced primarily by the Treasury Pool Management team. Given the relatively short-term nature of these
liabilities, they are predominantly used to fund liquid trading assets.




                                                                                                                              112
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                 Liquidity Risk Management




For diversifying our refinancing activities, Deutsche Bank holds a license to issue mortgage Pfandbriefe and maintains a
program to issue structured covered bonds. Additionally, the Group continues to run a program for the purpose of issuing
covered bonds under Spanish law (Cedulas). DB Group has also participated in ECB’s TLTRO III program. Under the Green
Financing Framework Deutsche Bank has issued its first Green Bond Senior Preferred issuance (U.S.$ 800 million) and first
green Formosa bonds (U.S.$ 400 million in total) to Taiwanese investors by a major global bank. Furthermore, multiple green
structured notes, first green deposits and first green repurchase agreements (repos) were executed.

The chart “Liquidity Risk Exposure: Funding Diversification” shows the composition of external funding sources that contribute
to the liquidity risk position, both in EUR billion and as a percentage of our total external funding sources.


Funds Transfer Pricing
The funds transfer pricing framework applies to all businesses/regions and promotes pricing of (i) assets in accordance with
their underlying liquidity risk, (ii) liabilities in accordance with their liquidity value and (iii) contingent liquidity exposures in
accordance with the cost of providing for appropriate liquidity reserves.

Within this framework funding and liquidity risk costs and benefits are allocated to the firm’s business units based on rates
which reflect the economic costs of liquidity for Deutsche Bank. Treasury might set further financial incentives in line with the
Bank’s liquidity risk guidelines. While the framework promotes a diligent group-wide allocation of the Bank's funding costs to
the liquidity users, it also provides an incentive-based framework for businesses generating stable long-term and stress
compliant funding.

Throughout 2021, the Bank continued to deliver against improvements of the changes to the internal FTP framework started
in 2019 aimed at enhancing its effectiveness as a management tool, as well as better supporting funding cost optimization.
Additional details are included in Note 5 „Business segments and related information“ of the consolidated financial statements.


Liquidity Reserves
Liquidity Reserves comprise available cash and cash equivalents, unencumbered highly liquid securities (including
government and agency bonds and government guarantees) and other unencumbered central bank eligible assets. Certain
intraday requirements and Mandatory Minimum Reserves are directly deducted in the calculation of the Liquidity Reserves
while other intraday outflows are represented in the Group’s internal liquidity model.

The vast majority of the Group’s liquidity reserves are held centrally across major currencies at the central bank accounts of
the parent entity and foreign branches in the key locations in which we are active and in a dedicated Treasury-owned Strategic
Liquidity Reserve (SLR), set up exclusively to serve as a mitigant during periods of stress. To ensure a prudent composition
of liquidity reserves across asset classes, minimum cash thresholds for the material currencies are maintained. In-line with
our communication to the market, going forward the Bank aims at focusing on its amount of High-quality Liquid Assets,
replacing the Liquidity Reserve measure, as it provides greater comparability across the industry.


Asset Encumbrance
Encumbered assets primarily comprise those on- and off-balance sheet assets that are pledged as collateral against secured
funding, collateral swaps, and other collateralized obligations. Generally, loans are encumbered to support long-term capital
markets secured issuance such as covered bonds or other self-securitization structures, while financing debt and equity
inventory on a secured basis is a regular activity for the Investment Bank business. Additionally, in line with the EBA technical
standards on regulatory asset encumbrance reporting, assets pledged with settlement systems are considered encumbered
assets, including default funds and initial margins, as well as other assets pledged which cannot be freely withdrawn such as
mandatory minimum reserves at central banks. Derivative margin receivable assets as encumbered under these EBA
guidelines are also included.




                                                                                                                                 113
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                                Enterprise risk management




Enterprise risk management
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) is a cross-risk function responsible for the bank’s overarching risk management
framework and portfolio management. ERM sets, allocates and monitors risk appetite and provides analytics and
recommendations to steer the strategy of the bank. ERM has the mandate to:

– Set the bank’s risk management framework seeking to ensure that all risks are identified, owned and assessed.
– Manage enterprise risk appetite, including the framework and methodology as to how appetite is applied across risk types,
  divisions, businesses and legal entities.
– Integrate and aggregate risks to provide greater enterprise risk transparency to support decision making.
– Commission forward-looking stress tests and manage group recovery plans.

Additionally, ERM acts as 2nd LoD function for enterprise risks, which relate to the potential losses or adverse consequences
from strategic risk, insufficient capital, portfolio concentrations, environmental, social and governance risks. This includes inter
alia the establishment of an appropriate risk governance, setting of a risk appetite, risk measurement and reporting. The
management of these risks is also closely integrated with the bank’s overall strategy and processes on internal capital and
liquidity adequacy.


Strategic risk
Strategic risk is the risk of a shortfall in earnings (excluding other material risks) due to incorrect business plans (owing to
flawed assumptions), ineffective plan execution or a lack of responsiveness to material plan deviations. Strategic risk arises
from the exposure of the bank to the macroeconomic environment, changes in the competitive landscape, and regulatory and
technological developments. Additionally, it could occur due to errors in strategic positioning, the bank’s failure to execute its
planned strategy and/or a failure to effectively address under-performance versus plan targets.

The strategic plan is developed annually and presented to the Management Board for discussion and approval. The final plan
is presented to the Supervisory Board. The plan is challenged in an iterative process with respect to its assumptions, credibility
and integrity. During the year, execution of business strategies is regularly monitored to assess the performance against
targets. A more comprehensive description of this process is detailed in the section ‘Strategic and Capital Plan’.

Strategic risk is measured through a dedicated risk model that quantifies potential losses caused by unexpected pre-tax
earnings shortfalls that cannot be offset by cost reductions under extreme but plausible market conditions over a 12-month
period.

The 2nd LoD function for strategic risk is ERM. Finance, together with the divisions, are the 1 st LoD and act as key risk managers
of the associated risk.


Capital risk
Capital risk is defined as the risk that Deutsche Bank has an insufficient level or composition of capital supply to support its
current and planned business activities and associated risks during normal and stressed conditions.

The bank’s capital risk framework consists of several elements which aim to ensure that Deutsche Bank maintains on an
ongoing basis an adequate capitalization to cover the risks to which is exposed. The framework is strongly integrated with the
bank-wide strategic planning process and closely linked to Deutsche Bank’s internal capital adequacy assessment process
(see section “Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process” for further details). Treasury together with the divisions are the
key risk managers of the associated risks and represent the 1 st LoD. ERM acts as the 2nd LoD for capital risk.

Our Treasury function manages capital risk at group level and locally in each region, as applicable. This includes managing
issuances and repurchases of capital instruments (see section on “Capital management” for details). Additionally, divisional
limits for our key capital resources are approved by the Group Asset and Liability Committee to ensure alignment with our
capital risk appetite (see section on “Resource limit setting” for details).

ERM sets the capital risk framework, assesses the capital risk profile and provides independent challenge. This includes
setting of risk appetite thresholds for key capital ratios. Threshold breaches are subject to a dedicated governance framework
triggering management actions up to the execution of Deutsche Bank’s recovery plan. Thresholds also provide boundaries to
the capital plan and are fully integrated into the regular assessment of capital risk under stress scenarios.




                                                                                                                               114
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Enterprise risk management




Portfolio concentration risk
Risk concentrations refer to clusters of the same or similar risk drivers within specific risk types (intra-risk concentrations in
credit, market, operational and strategic risks) as well as across different risk types (inter-risk concentrations). They occur
within and across counterparties, businesses, regions/countries, industries and products. The management and monitoring of
risk concentrations is achieved through a quantitative and qualitative approach, as follows:

– Intra-risk concentrations are assessed, monitored and mitigated by the individual risk functions (credit, market, operational,
  liquidity and strategic risk management). This is supported by limit setting on different levels and/or management according
  to each risk type.
– Inter-risk concentrations are managed through quantitative top-down stress-testing and qualitative bottom-up reviews,
  identifying and assessing risk themes independent of any risk type and providing a holistic view across the bank. The
  diversification effects between credit, market, operational and strategic risk are measured through a dedicated risk model
  that quantifies the diversification benefit caused by non-perfect correlations between these risk types. The calculation of
  the risk type diversification benefit is intended to ensure that the standalone economic capital figures for the individual risk
  types are aggregated in an economically meaningful way.

The most senior governance body for the oversight of risk concentrations throughout 2021 was the Group Risk Committee
(GRC).


Environmental, social and governance risk
The impacts of rising global temperatures, and the enhanced focus on climate change and the transition to a net-zero economy
from society, our regulators and the banking sector have led to the emergence of new and increasing sources of financial and
non-financial risks. These include the physical risks arising from extreme weather events, which are growing in frequency and
severity, as well as transition risks as carbon intensive sectors are faced with higher taxation, reduced demand and potentially
restricted access to financing. These risks can impact Deutsche Bank across a broad range of financial and non-financial risk
types.

Financial institutions are facing increased scrutiny on climate and broader ESG-related issues from governments, regulators,
shareholders and other bodies, leading to reputational risks if we are not seen to support the transition to a lower carbon
economy, to protect biodiversity and human rights. We are also required to review and enhance our ESG risk management
frameworks in alignment with emerging regulatory guidance and to ensure that we prevent Greenwashing. There is a lack of
consistent and comprehensive ESG data and methodologies available today which means that we are heavily reliant on proxy
estimates and qualitative approaches when assessing the risks to our balance sheet and introduce a high degree of uncertainty
into our climate-related disclosures. In 2022, the ECB will conduct its first climate stress test, an exercise which will be
extremely valuable as a learning exercise but contains a number of novel and complex elements which require the
development of new methodologies and data sources.

Deutsche Bank is committed to managing our business activities and operations in a sustainable manner, including aligning
our portfolios with net zero emissions by 2050. Deutsche Bank’s Group Sustainability Committee of the Management Board,
which is chaired by the Chief Executive Officer, decides on all important sustainability initiatives. The Committee is advised
by the Sustainability Council, composed of executives from business divisions and infrastructure functions. The Group Risk
Committee (GRC), chaired by the Chief Risk Officer, is established by the Management Board to serve as the central forum
for review and decision making on matters related to risk, capital, and liquidity. This includes the responsibility for developing
the Bank’s Climate and broader ESG Risk Frameworks. A dedicated ESG Risk Forum oversees the integration ESG risks into
the bank’s existing financial and non-financial risk management frameworks.

Climate and other ESG risks are incorporated into our risk taxonomy as discrete risk types. Our business activities are
governed by a dedicated Climate and Environmental Risk Policy outlining roles, responsibilities as well as qualitative risk
appetite principles and quantitative risk-appetite metrics. In addition, our Environmental and Social policy outlines specific
restrictions for certain sectors. We use a number of complementary tools to identify and assess risks including our group risk
identification process, an internal climate risk taxonomy and regular internal reporting of portfolio financed emissions and
intensities. In addition, our risk-led annual reviews of our industry and country portfolio strategy include an assessment of
climate risk vulnerability.




                                                                                                                             115
Deutsche Bank                                   Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                              Model Risk Management




Model Risk Management
Introduction
Model risk is the potential for adverse consequences from decisions based on incorrect or misused model outputs. Model risk
can lead to: financial loss, poor business or strategic decision making, or damage to our reputation. DB recognizes the use of
models can affect other risk-types, and that model risk is a distinct risk that can increase or decrease aggregate risk across
other risk-types.

Deutsche Bank uses models for a broad range of decision-making activities, such as: underwriting credits; valuing exposures,
instruments, and positions; measuring risk; managing and safeguarding client assets and determining capital and reserve
adequacy. The term ‘model’ refers to a quantitative method, system, or approach that applies statistical, economic, financial,
or mathematical theories, techniques, and assumptions to process input data into quantitative estimates. Models are simplified
representations of real-world relationships and are based on assumptions and judgment. Accordingly, the bank is exposed to
model risk, which must be identified, measured, and controlled appropriately.

Model risk management oversight is provided by all levels of management, including the Management Board. Management
of model risk is underpinned by a framework designed and monitored by 2nd Line of Defence, including components across
the lifecycle of a model.


Model Risk Management Framework and Governance
Model risk is one of the bank’s Level 1 risks, and is overseen by the Chief Risk Officer through the setting of a quantitative
and qualitative risk appetite statement, and managed through:

– Model risk policies and procedures, and supporting Key Operating Documents (KODs) aligned to risk appetite, regulatory
  requirements, and industry best practice, with clear roles and responsibilities for stakeholders;
– Inventorization of all models, supporting ongoing model risk framework components including risk assessments and
  attestations;
– Key controls for all models from development through to decommissioning, including validation, approval, deployment and
  monitoring:
  – Independent Validations, and subsequent 2LoD approvals, verify that models have been appropriately designed and
     implemented for their intended scope and purpose, and that respective controls are in place to assure that they continue
     to perform as expected during their use;
  – The controls identify models’ limitations and weaknesses, resulting in findings and compensating controls, these may
     be conditions for use, such as adjustments or overlays;
– Model risk governance, including senior forums for monitoring and escalation of model risk related topics, as well as monthly
  updates to the Management Board on the model risk appetite metrics, and periodic model risk updates to the Supervisory
  Board.


Developments during the reporting period:
Model risk has been elevated to a Level 1 in the bank’s Group Risk Type Taxonomy reflecting the scope and importance of
model risk to the firm. This was previously covered as a Level 3 risk under operational risk (“model misuse risk”). In addition,
consequences for non-compliance with the model risk policy have been enhanced.

At the start of 2021, a strategic initiative was underway to refresh all aspects of the model risk framework bringing alignme nt
of practices across the bank including identification, measurement, monitoring, reporting, controls, and mitigation of model
risks. This new framework is supported by the development of an enhanced Model Inventory system. Phase one of
implementation is focused on our US operations, with bank-wide implementation planned for 2022.




                                                                                                                           116
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and Capital Management
Annual Report 2021                               Reputational Risk Management




Reputational Risk Management
Within our risk management process, reputational risk is defined as the risk of possible damage to Deutsche Bank’s brand
and reputation, and the associated risk to earnings, capital or liquidity arising from any association, action or inaction wh ich
could be perceived by stakeholders to be inappropriate, unethical or inconsistent with the DB’s values and beliefs.

Deutsche Bank seeks to ensure that reputational risk is as low as reasonably practicable. Reputational risk cannot be
precluded as it can be driven by unforeseeable changes in perception of our practices by our various stakeholders (e.g. public,
clients, shareholders and regulators). Deutsche Bank strives to promote sustainable standards that will enhance profitability
and minimize reputational risk.

The Reputational Risk Framework (the Framework) is in place to manage the process through which active decisions are
taken on matters which may pose a reputational risk, before the event, and in doing so to prevent damage to Deutsche Bank’s
reputation wherever possible. The Framework provides consistent standards for the identification, assessment and
management of reputational risk issues. Reputational impacts which may arise as a consequence of a failure from another
risk type, control or process are addressed separately via the associated risk type framework and are therefore not addressed
in this section. The reputational risk could arise from multiple sources including, but not limited to, potential issues with the
profile of the counterparty, the business purpose / economic substance of the transaction or product, high risk industries,
environmental and social considerations, and the nature of the transaction or product or its structure and terms.

The modelling and quantitative measurement of reputational risk internal capital is implicitly covered in our economic capital
framework primarily within strategic risk.


Governance and Organizational Structure
The Framework is applicable across all Business Divisions and Regions. DWS-specific matters are reviewed by a DWS-
dedicated reputational risk committee and escalated to the DWS Executive Board where required.

Whilst every employee has a responsibility to protect our reputation, the primary responsibility for the identification,
assessment, management, monitoring and, if necessary, referring or reporting of reputational risk matters lies with Deutsche
Bank’s Business Divisions as the primary risk owners. Each Business Division has an established process through which
matters, which are deemed to be a moderate or greater reputational risk are assessed, the Unit Reputational Risk Assessment
Process (Unit RRAP).

The Unit RRAP is required to refer any material reputational risk matters to the respective Regional Reputational Risk
Committee (RRRC). The Framework also sets out a number of matters which are considered inherently higher risk from a
reputational risk perspective and are therefore mandatory referrals to the RRRCs. The RRRCs, which are 2nd LoD
Committees, are responsible for ensuring the oversight, governance and coordination of the management of reputational risk
in the respective region of Deutsche Bank. The RRRCs meet, as a minimum, on a quarterly basis with ad hoc meetings as
required. The Group Reputational Risk Committee (GRRC) is responsible for ensuring the oversight, governance and
coordination of the management of reputational risk at Deutsche Bank on behalf of the Group Risk Committee and the
Management Board. Additionally, the GRRC reviews cases with a Group wide impact and in exceptional circumstances, those
that could not be resolved at a regional level.




                                                                                                                            117
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                               Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Risk and capital performance

Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL
Own Funds
The calculation of our own funds incorporates the capital requirements following the “Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on
prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms” (Capital Requirements Regulation or “CRR”) and the
“Directive 2013/36/EU on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and
investment firms” (Capital Requirements Directive or “CRD”) which have been further amended with subsequent Regulations
and Directives. The CRD has been implemented into German law. The information in this section as well as in the section
“Development of risk-weighted Assets” is based on the regulatory principles of consolidation.

This section refers to the capital adequacy of the group of entities consolidated for banking regulatory purposes pursuant to
the CRR and the German Banking Act (“Kreditwesengesetz” or “KWG”). Therein not included are insurance companies or
companies outside the finance sector.

The total own funds pursuant to the effective regulations as of year-end 2021 comprises Tier 1 and Tier 2 (T2) capital. Tier 1
capital is subdivided into Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital and Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital.

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital consists primarily of common share capital (reduced by own holdings) including related
share premium accounts, retained earnings (including losses for the financial year, if any) and accumulated other
comprehensive income, subject to regulatory adjustments (i.e. prudential filters and deductions), as well as minority interests
qualifying for inclusion in consolidated CET1 capital. Prudential filters for CET 1 capital, according to Articles 32 to 35 CRR,
include (i) securitization gains on sale, (ii) cash flow hedges and changes in the value of own liabilities, and (iii) additi onal
value adjustments. CET 1 capital deductions for instance includes (i) intangible assets (exceeding their prudential value), (ii)
deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability, (iii) negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss
amounts, (iv) net defined benefit pension fund assets, (v) reciprocal cross holdings in the capital of financial sector entities
and, (vi) significant and non-significant investments in the capital (CET 1, AT1, T2) of financial sector entities above certain
thresholds. All items not deducted (i.e., amounts below the threshold) are subject to risk-weighting.

Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital consists of AT1 capital instruments and related share premium accounts as well as
noncontrolling interests qualifying for inclusion in consolidated AT1 capital. To qualify as AT1 capital under CRR/CRD,
instruments must have principal loss absorption through a conversion to common shares or a write-down mechanism
allocating losses at a trigger point and must also meet further requirements (perpetual with no incentive to redeem; institution
must have full dividend/coupon discretion at all times, etc.).

Tier 2 (T2) capital comprises eligible capital instruments, the related share premium accounts and subordinated long-term
debt, certain loan loss provisions and noncontrolling interests that qualify for inclusion in consolidated T2 capital. To qualify
as T2 capital, capital instruments or subordinated debt must have an original maturity of at least five years. Moreover, eligible
capital instruments may inter alia not contain an incentive to redeem, a right of investors to accelerate repayment, or a credit
sensitive dividend feature

We present in this report certain figures based on the CRR definition of own fund instruments applicable for Additional Tier 1
(AT1) capital and Tier 2 (T2) capital and figures based thereon, (including Tier 1, Total Capital and Leverage Ratio) on a “fully
loaded” basis. We calculate such “fully loaded” figures excluding the transitional arrangements for own fund instruments as
provided in the currently applicable CRR/CRD.

Our CET1 and RWA figures include the transitional impacts from the IFRS 9 add-back also in the “fully-loaded” figures given
it is an immaterial difference.

Transitional arrangements are applicable for AT1 and T2 instruments. Capital instruments issued on or prior to December 31,
2011, that no longer qualify as AT1 or T2 capital under the fully loaded CRR/CRD as currently applicable are subject to
grandfathering rules during the transitional period and are being phased out from 2013 to 2022 with their recognition capped
at 20 % in 2020 and 10 % in 2021 (in relation to the portfolio eligible for grandfathering which was still in issue on December 31,
2012) with grandfathering phasing out completely from January 1, 2022.




                                                                                                                              118
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                               Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




The current CRR as applicable since June 27, 2019 provides further grandfathering rules for AT1 and T2 instruments issued
prior to June 27, 2019. Thereunder, AT1 and T2 instruments issued through special purpose entities are grandfathered until
December 31, 2021. Beyond 2021, transitional arrangements only exist for AT1 and T2 instruments which continue to qualify
until June 26, 2025 even if they do not meet certain new requirements that apply since June 27, 2019. We had immaterial
amounts of such instruments outstanding at year end 2021, which practically removes the difference between “fully loaded”
and “transitional” AT1 and T2 instruments starting from January 1, 2022.

We believe that these “fully loaded” calculations provide useful information to investors as they reflect our progress against
known future regulatory capital standards. Many of our competitors have been describing calculations on a “fully loaded” basis,
however, our competitors’ assumptions and estimates regarding “fully loaded” calculations may vary such that, our “fully
loaded” measures may not be comparable with similarly labelled measures used by our competitors.


Capital instruments
Our Management Board received approval from the 2020 Annual General Meeting to buy back up to 206.7 million shares
before the end of April 2025. Thereof 103.3 million shares can be purchased by using derivatives, this includes 41.3 million
derivatives with a maturity exceeding 18 months. During the period from the 2020 Annual General Meeting until the 2021
Annual General Meeting (May 27, 2021), 28.7 million shares were purchased. The shares purchased were used for equity
compensation purposes in the same period or are to be used in the upcoming period so that the number of shares held in
Treasury from buybacks was 3.7 million as of the 2021 Annual General Meeting.

The 2021 Annual General Meeting granted our Management Board the approval to buy back up to 206.7 million shares before
the end of April 2026. Thereof 103.3 million shares can be purchased by using derivatives, this includes 41.3 million derivatives
with a maturity exceeding 18 months. These authorizations substitute the authorizations of the previous year. During the
period from the 2021 Annual General Meeting until December 31, 2021, 4.0 million shares and 24.0 million call options were
purchased. The shares in inventory are to be used in this period or upcoming periods for equity compensation purposes; the
number of shares held in Treasury from buybacks was 0.7 million as of December 31, 2021. The call options are to be used
also for equity compensation purposes in the upcoming periods.

Since the 2017 Annual General Meeting, renewed at the 2021 Annual General Meeting, and as of December 31, 2021,
authorized capital available to the Management Board is € 2,560 million (1,000 million shares). As of December 31, 2021, the
conditional capital against cash stands at € 512 million (200 million shares). The Management Board has decided that it will
not make use of this conditional capital. Additional conditional capital for equity compensation amounts to € 51.2 million (20
million shares). Further, the 2018 Annual General Meeting authorized the issuance of participatory notes and other Hybrid
Debt Securities that fulfill the regulatory requirements to qualify as Additional Tier 1 capital with an equivalent value of € 8.0
billion.

Our legacy Hybrid Tier 1 capital instruments (substantially all noncumulative trust preferred securities) are not recognized
under fully loaded CRR/CRD rules as Additional Tier 1 capital, mainly because they have no write-down or equity conversion
feature. During the transitional phase-out period the maximum recognizable amount of Additional Tier 1 instruments from
Basel 2.5 compliant issuances as of December 31, 2012 will be reduced at the beginning of each financial year by 10 % or
€ 1.3 billion, through 2022. For December 31, 2021, this resulted in eligible Additional Tier 1 instruments of € 8.9 billion (i.e.
€ 8.3 billion AT1 Notes recognized under fully loaded CRR/CRD rules as well as € 0.6 billion of legacy Hybrid Tier 1
instruments recognizable during the transition period; the latter are recognized as regulatory capital as of December 2021 for
the last time). In 2021, the bank issued AT1 notes amounting to € 2.5 billion. Furthermore, the bank redeemed legacy Hybrid
Tier 1 instruments with a notional of € 0.5 billion.

The total of our Tier 2 capital instruments as of December 31, 2021 recognized during the transition period under CRR/CRD
was € 7.4 billion (nominal value of € 8.8 billion). Tier 2 instruments recognized under fully loaded CRR/CRD rules amounted
to € 7.3 billion (nominal value of € 8.7 billion). In 2021, the bank issued Tier 2 capital instruments with a nominal value o f
U.S.$ 1.25 billion (equivalent amount of € 1.1 billion). Furthermore, Tier 2 capital instruments with a notional of € 0.3 billion
were redeemed.


Minimum capital requirements and additional capital buffers
The Pillar 1 CET 1 minimum capital requirement applicable to the Group is 4.50 % of risk-weighted assets (RWA). The Pillar 1
total capital requirement of 8.00 % demands further resources that may be met with up to 1.50 % Additional Tier 1 capital and
up to 2.00 % Tier 2 capital.

Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in supervisory measures such as restrictions of profit distributions or
limitations on certain businesses such as lending. We complied with the minimum regulatory capital adequacy requirements
in 2021.



                                                                                                                             119
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                               Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




In addition to these minimum capital requirements, the following combined capital buffer requirements were fully effective
beginning 2021 onwards. These buffer requirements must be met in addition to the Pillar 1 minimum capital requirements, but
can be drawn down in times of economic stress.

The capital conservation buffer is implemented in Section 10c German Banking Act, based on Article 129 CRD and equals a
requirement of 2.50 % CET 1 capital of RWA in 2021 and onwards.

The countercyclical capital buffer is deployed in a jurisdiction when excess credit growth is associated with an increase in
system-wide risk. It may vary between 0 % and 2.50 % CET 1 capital of RWA by 2022. In exceptional cases, it could also be
higher than 2.50 %. The institution-specific countercyclical buffer that applies to Deutsche Bank is the weighted average of
the countercyclical capital buffers that apply in the jurisdictions where our relevant credit exposures are located. As per
December 31, 2021, the institution-specific countercyclical capital buffer was at 0.03 %.

In addition to the aforementioned buffers, national authorities, such as the BaFin, may require a systemic risk buffer to prevent
and mitigate long-term non-cyclical systemic or macro-prudential risks that are not covered by the CRR. They can require an
additional buffer of up to 5.00 % CET 1 capital of RWA. As of the year-end 2021, no systemic risk buffer applied to Deutsche
Bank.

Deutsche Bank continues to be designated as a global systemically important institution (G-SII) by the German Federal
Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) in agreement with the Deutsche Bundesbank, resulting in a G-SII buffer requirement
of 1.50 % CET 1 capital of RWA in 2021 based on the indicators as published in 2019. This assessment has been confirmed
by the FSB in 2020 and 2021. We will continue to publish our indicators on our website.

Additionally, Deutsche Bank AG has been classified by BaFin in agreement with the Deutsche Bundesbank as an “other
systemically important institution” (O-SII) with an additional capital buffer requirement of 2.00 % in 2021 that has to be met on
a consolidated level. Hence, for Deutsche Bank, the O-SII buffer amounts to 2.00 % in 2021. The higher of the buffers for
systemically important institutions (G-SII buffer or O-SII buffer) must be applied.

In addition, pursuant to the Pillar 2 Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP), the European Central Bank (ECB)
may impose capital requirements on individual banks which are more stringent than statutory requirements (so-called Pillar 2
requirement).

On December 9, 2019, Deutsche Bank was informed by the ECB of its decision regarding prudential minimum capital
requirements for 2020 that applied from January 1, 2020 onwards, following the results of the 2019 SREP. The decision set
ECB’s Pillar 2 Requirement (P2R) to 2.50 % of RWA, effective as of January 1, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, Deutsche
Bank needs to maintain on a consolidated basis a CET 1 ratio of at least 10.43 %, a Tier 1 ratio of at least 12.40 % and a
Total Capital ratio of at least 15.03 %. The CET 1 requirement comprises the Pillar 1 minimum capital requirement of 4.50 %,
the Pillar 2 requirement (SREP add-on) of 1.41 %, the capital conservation buffer of 2.50 %, the countercyclical buffer (subject
to changes throughout the year) of 0.03 % and the higher of our G-SII/O-SII buffer of 2.00 %. Correspondingly, the Tier 1
capital requirement includes additionally a Tier 1 minimum capital requirement of 1.50 % plus a Pillar 2 requirement of 0.47 %,
and the Total Capital requirement includes further a Tier 2 minimum capital requirement of 2.00 % and a Pillar 2 requirement
of 0.63 %. Also, the ECB communicated to Deutsche Bank that its individual expectation to hold a further Pillar 2 CET 1 capital
add-on, commonly referred to as ‘Pillar 2 guidance’ will be seen as guidance only and – until at least year-end 2022 – a breach
of this guidance will not trigger the need to provide a capital restoration plan or a need to execute measures to re-build CET
1 capital.

In February 2022, the ECB informed us of its decision effective 1 March 2022 that our Pillar 2 Requirement remains
unchanged. In 2021, Deutsche Bank has participated in the EBA Stress Test 2021 which was postponed from 2020 due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. By its standard procedures, the ECB has considered our quantitative performance in the adverse
scenario as an input when reconsidering the level of the Pillar 2 Guidance in its 2021 SREP assessment and our qualitative
performance as one aspect when holistically reviewing the Pillar 2 Requirement.

In January 2022, the BaFin announced a countercyclical buffer of 0.75 % for Germany effective February 1, 2023, which
translates into approximately 30 bps CET1 capital requirement for Deutsche Bank Group given our current share of German
credit exposures. Additionally, the BaFin is considering a sectoral systemic risk buffer of 2 % for German residential real estate
exposures effective February 1, 2023. If implemented as considered, this sectoral buffer could increase the CET1 capital
requirement for Deutsche Bank Group by approximately 20 bps, considering our current German residential real estate
exposure.




                                                                                                                             120
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




The following table gives an overview of the different Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 minimum capital requirements (but excluding the
Pillar 2 guidance) as well as capital buffer requirements applicable to Deutsche Bank for years 2021 and 2022.

Overview total capital requirements and capital buffers
                                                                                                                                                        2021                 2022
Pillar 1
Minimum CET 1 requirement                                                                                                                            4.50 %               4.50 %
Combined buffer requirement                                                                                                                          4.53 %               4.53 %
   Capital Conservation Buffer                                                                                                                       2.50 %               2.50 %
   Countercyclical Buffer                                                                                                                            0.03 %               0.03 %¹
   Systemic Risk Buffer                                                                                                                              0.00 %               0.00 %²
   Maximum of:                                                                                                                                       2.00 %               2.00 %
      G-SII Buffer                                                                                                                                   1.50 %               1.50 %
      O-SII Buffer                                                                                                                                   2.00 %               2.00 %
Pillar 2
Pillar 2 SREP Add-on of CET 1 capital (excluding the "Pillar 2" guidance)                                                                           2.50 %                2.50 %
   of which covered by CET 1 capital                                                                                                                1.41 %                1.41 %
   of which covered by Tier 1 capital                                                                                                               1.88 %                1.88 %
   of which covered by Tier 2 capital                                                                                                               0.63 %                0.63 %
Total CET 1 requirement from Pillar 1 and 2³                                                                                                       10.43 %               10.43 %
Total Tier 1 requirement from Pillar 1 and 2                                                                                                       12.40 %               12.40 %
Total capital requirement from Pillar 1 and 2                                                                                                      15.03 %               15.03 %
1
    Deutsche Bank’s countercyclical buffer requirement is subject to country-specific buffer rates decreed by EBA and the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision (BCBS) as
    well as Deutsche Bank’s relevant credit exposures as per respective reporting date. The countercyclical buffer rate for 2022 has been assumed to be 0.03 % as per beginning
    of the year 2022. The countercyclical buffer is subject to changes throughout the year depending on its constituents.
2
    The systemic risk buffer has been assumed to remain at 0 % for the projected year 2022, subject to changes based on further directives.
3
    The total Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 CET 1 requirement (excluding the “Pillar 2” guidance) is calculated as the sum of the SREP requirement, the systemic risk buffer requirement, the
    capital conservation buffer requirement and countercyclical buffer requirement as well as the higher of the G-SII, O-SII.



Development of Own Funds
Our Total Regulatory capital as of December 31, 2021 amounted to € 62.7 billion compared to € 58.7 billion at the end of
December 31, 2020. Our Tier 1 capital as of December 31, 2021 amounted to € 55.4 billion, consisting of a Common Equity
Tier 1 (CET 1) capital of € 46.5 billion and Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital of € 8.9 billion. The Tier 1 capital was € 3.6 b illion
higher than at the end of December 31, 2020, driven by an increase in CET 1 capital of € 1.6 billion and an increase in AT1
capital of € 2.0 billion since year end 2020.

The CET 1 capital increase of € 1.6 billion was largely the result of our positive net profit of € 2.4 billion as of December 31,
2021 which was partially offset by regulatory deductions for future common share dividend and AT1 coupon payments of, in
aggregate of € 1.0 billion, in line with the ECB Decision (EU) (2015/656) on the recognition of interim or year -end profits in
CET 1 capital in accordance with the Article 26(2) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (ECB/2015/4). Additional increases include
the result of positive effects from Currency Translation Adjustments of € 1.1 billion net of foreign exchange counter-effects of
capital deduction items. Furthermore our CET 1 capital increased by € 0.7 billion mainly driven by a release of regulatory
capital deductions following improvements in our valuation control framework in fourth quarter of 2021.

These positive impacts were partly offset by negative effects from increased regulatory adjustments from prudential filters of
€ 0.4 billion (additional value adjustments) due to re-introduction of pre-crisis methodology and model change related to Pruval
rule book change, increased capital deduction from negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss amounts
of € 0.5 billion, unrealized loss from financial instruments at fair value through other comprehensive income of € 0.4 billio n
driven mainly by gains realized in P&L, rising interest rates and widening credit spreads and € 0.2 billion caused by regular
contribution through irrevocable payment commitments related to the Deposit Guarantee Scheme and the Single Resolution
Fund.

The € 2.0 billion increase in AT1 capital resulted from the new issuance of two AT1 capital instruments with a cumulative
notional amount of € 2.5 billion during the second and the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by call and redemption of one
legacy hybrid Tier 1 instrument, recognizable as AT1 capital during the transition period, with a notional amount of € 0.5 billion
in the fourth quarter of 2021.

Our fully loaded Total Regulatory capital as of December 31, 2021 was € 62.1 billion compared to € 57.3 billion at the end of
December 31, 2020. Our fully loaded Tier 1 capital as of December 31, 2021 was € 54.8 billion, compared to € 50.6 billion at
the end of December 31, 2020. Our fully loaded AT1 capital amounted to € 8.3 billion as of December 31, 2021 which increased
compared to € 5.7 billion at the end of December 31, 2020 due to the above-mentioned € 2.5 billion issuances. Our CET 1
capital amounted to € 46.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 compared to € 44.9 billion at the end of December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                               121
Deutsche Bank                                                     Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Own Funds Template (including RWA and capital ratios)
                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021                    Dec 31, 2020 ³
                                                                                                                CRR/CRD                         CRR/CRD
in € m.                                                                                                        fully-loaded     CRR/CRD        fully loaded       CRR/CRD
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital: instruments and reserves
  Capital instruments, related share premium accounts and other reserves                                          45,864          45,864           45,890           45,890
  Retained earnings                                                                                               10,506          10,506            9,784            9,784
  Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                         (444)           (444)          (1,118)          (1,118)
  Independently reviewed interim profits net of any foreseeable charge or dividend1                                1,379           1,379              253              253
  Other                                                                                                              910             910              805              805
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital before regulatory adjustments                                                58,215          58,215           55,613           55,613

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital: regulatory adjustments
  Additional value adjustments (negative amount)                                                                   (1,812)         (1,812)         (1,430)          (1,430)
  Other prudential filters (other than additional value adjustments)                                                  (14)            (14)           (112)            (112)
  Goodwill and other intangible assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                          (4,897)         (4,897)         (4,635)          (4,635)
  Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability excluding those arising from
  temporary differences (net of related tax liabilities where the conditions in Art. 38 (3)
  CRR are met) (negative amount)                                                                                   (1,466)         (1,466)         (1,353)          (1,353)
  Negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss amounts                                           (573)           (573)            (99)             (99)
  Defined benefit pension fund assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                             (991)           (991)           (772)            (772)
  Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by an institution of own CET 1 instruments (negative
  amount)                                                                                                                0               0               0                0
  Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by the institution of the CET 1 instruments of financial
  sector entities where the institution has a significant investment in those entities (amount
  above the 10 % / 15 % thresholds and net of eligible short positions) (negative amount)                                0               0               0                0
  Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liabilities where
  the conditions in Art. 38 (3) CRR are met) (amount above the 10 % / 15 % thresholds)
  (negative amount)                                                                                                 (151)           (151)             (75)             (75)
  Other regulatory adjustments2                                                                                   (1,805)         (1,805)          (2,252)          (2,252)
Total regulatory adjustments to Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital                                             (11,709)        (11,709)         (10,728)         (10,728)
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital                                                                              46,506          46,506           44,885           44,885

Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital: instruments
  Capital instruments and the related share premium accounts                                                        8,328           8,328           5,828            5,828
  Amount of qualifying items referred to in Art. 484 (4) CRR and the related share
  premium accounts subject to phase out from AT1                                                                     N/M              600            N/M             1,100
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital before regulatory adjustments                                                       8,328           8,928           5,828            6,928

Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital: regulatory adjustments
  Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by an institution of own AT1 instruments
  (negative amount)                                                                                                    (60)           (60)             (80)             (80)
  Residual amounts deducted from AT1 capital with regard to deduction from CET 1 capital
  during the transitional period pursuant to Art. 472 CRR                                                                                            N/M              N/M
  Other regulatory adjustments                                                                                         0               0                0                0
Total regulatory adjustments to Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital                                                      (60)            (60)             (80)             (80)
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital                                                                                    8,268           8,868            5,748            6,848
Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET 1 + AT1)                                                                                 54,775          55,375           50,634           51,734

Tier 2 (T2) capital                                                                                                7,328           7,358           6,623            6,944
Total capital (TC = T1 + T2)                                                                                      62,102          62,732          57,257           58,677
Total risk-weighted assets                                                                                       351,629         351,629         328,951          328,951

Capital ratios
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio (as a percentage of risk-weighted assets)                                         13.2            13.2            13.6              13.6
Tier 1 capital ratio (as a percentage of risk-weighted assets)                                                       15.6            15.7            15.4              15.7
Total capital ratio (as a percentage of risk-weighted assets)                                                        17.7            17.8            17.4              17.8
N/M – Not meaningful
1
  Full year profit is recognized as per ECB Decision (EU) 2015/656 in accordance with the Article 26(2) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (ECB/2015/4).
2 Includes capital deductions of 1.1 billion (December 2020: € 0.9 billion) based on ECB guidance on irrevocable payment commitments related to the Single Resolution Fund

  and the Deposit Guarantee Scheme, € 0.7 billion (December 2020: € 0.7 billion) based on ECB’s supervisory recommendation for a prudential provisioning of non-performing
  exposures, € 17 million resulting from minimum value commitments as per Article 36 (1)(n) of the CRR which became effective June 30, 2021 and CET 1 increase of € 39
  million (December 2020: € 54 million) from IFRS 9 transitional provision as per Article 473a of the CRR. Capital deductions of € 0.7 billion, based on regular ECB review,
  included at December 2020, have been released as of December 31, 2021.
3 The Common Equity Tier 1 capital for December 31, 2020 has been updated to reflect a dividend payment of zero for the financial year 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                        122
Deutsche Bank                                                        Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                   Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Reconciliation of shareholders’ equity to Own Funds
                                                                                                                                                                    CRR/CRD
in € m.                                                                                                                                      Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020 ³
Total shareholders’ equity per accounting balance sheet                                                                                           58,027               54,786
Deconsolidation/Consolidation of entities                                                                                                            265                  265
  Of which:
  Additional paid-in capital                                                                                                                           0                    0
  Retained earnings                                                                                                                                  265                  265
  Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                                                            0                    0
Total shareholders' equity per regulatory balance sheet                                                                                           58,292               55,050
Minority Interests (amount allowed in consolidated CET 1)                                                                                            910                  805
AT1 coupon and shareholder dividend deduction1                                                                                                      (987)                (242)
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital before regulatory adjustments                                                                                58,215               55,613
Additional value adjustments                                                                                                                      (1,812)              (1,430)
Other prudential filters (other than additional value adjustments)                                                                                   (14)                (112)
Goodwill and other intangible assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                                                           (4,897)              (4,635)
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability                                                                                             (1,617)              (1,428)
Defined benefit pension fund assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                                                              (991)                (772)
Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by the institution of the CET 1 instruments of financial sector entities
where the institution has a significant investment in those entities                                                                                   0                    0
Other regulatory adjustments2                                                                                                                     (2,378)              (2,351)
Common Equity Tier 1 capital                                                                                                                      46,506               44,885
1
    Full year profit is recognized as per ECB Decision (EU) 2015/656 in accordance with the Article 26(2) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (ECB/2015/4).
2
    Includes capital deductions of 1.1 billion (December 2020: € 0.9 billion) based on ECB guidance on irrevocable payment commitments related to the Single Resolution Fund
    and the Deposit Guarantee Scheme, € 0.7 billion (December 2020: € 0.7 billion) based on ECB’s supervisory recommendation for a prudential provisioning of non-performing
    exposures, € 0.6 billion (December 2020: € 0.1 billion) negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss amounts, € 17 million resulting from minimum value
    commitments as per Article 36 (1)(n) of the CRR which became effective June 30, 2021 and CET 1 increase of € 39 million (December 2020: € 54 million) from IFRS 9
    transitional provision as per Article 473a of the CRR. Capital deductions of € 0.7 billion, based on regular ECB review, included at December 2020, have been released as of
    December 31, 2021.
3
    The Common Equity Tier 1 capital for December 31, 2020 has been updated to reflect a dividend payment of zero for the financial year 2020.


Development of Own Funds
                                                                                                                                                                    CRR/CRD
                                                                                                                                            twelve months       twelve months
                                                                                                                                                    ended               ended
in € m.                                                                                                                                      Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020 ²
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital - opening amount                                                                                             44,885               44,148
Common shares, net effect
                                                                                                                                                       0                    0
Additional paid-in capital                                                                                                                           (26)                 113
Retained earnings                                                                                                                                  2,834                  854
Common shares in treasury, net effect/(+) sales (–) purchase                                                                                           1                   (3)
Movements in accumulated other comprehensive income                                                                                                  675               (1,655)
AT1 coupon and shareholder dividend deduction ¹                                                                                                     (987)                (242)
Additional value adjustments                                                                                                                        (381)                 308
Goodwill and other intangible assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                                                             (262)               1,880
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability (excluding those arising from temporary differences)                                          (113)                (227)
Negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss amounts                                                                            (474)                 160
Defined benefit pension fund assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                                                              (219)                 119
Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by the institution of the CET 1 instruments of financial sector entities
where the institution has a significant investment in those entities                                                                                     0                   0
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (amount above 10 % and 15 % threshold,
net of related tax liabilities where the conditions in Art. 38 (3) CRR are met)                                                                      (77)                 244
Other, including regulatory adjustments                                                                                                              650                 (814)
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital - closing amount                                                                                             46,506               44,885
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) Capital – opening amount                                                                                                   6,848                6,397
New Additional Tier 1 eligible capital issues                                                                                                      2,487                1,134
Matured and called instruments                                                                                                                      (500)                (713)
Other, including regulatory adjustments                                                                                                               33                   30
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) Capital – closing amount                                                                                                   8,868                6,848
Tier 1 capital                                                                                                                                    55,375               51,734
Tier 2 (T2) capital – closing amount                                                                                                               7,358                6,944
Total regulatory capital                                                                                                                          62,732               58,677
1
    Full year profit is recognized as per ECB Decision (EU) 2015/656 in accordance with the Article 26(2) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (ECB/2015/4).
2
    The Common Equity Tier 1 capital for December 31, 2020 has been updated to reflect a dividend payment of zero for the financial year 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                           123
Deutsche Bank                                   Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                              Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Minimum loss coverage for Non Performing Exposure (NPE)

In April 2019, the EU published requirements Regulation (EU) 2019/630 amending the CRR (Regulation (EU) No 575/2013)
for a prudential backstop reserve for non-performing exposure (NPE). This regulation results in a Pillar 1 deduction from CET
1 capital when a minimum loss coverage requirement is not met. It is applied to exposures originated and defaulted after April
25, 2019.

In addition, in March 2018, the ECB published its “Addendum to the ECB Guidance to banks on non-performing loans:
supervisory expectations for prudential provisioning of non-performing exposures” and in August 2019, its “Communication
on supervisory coverage expectations for NPEs”.

The ECB guidance issued is applicable to all newly defaulted loans after April 1, 2018 (ECB-NPE-Flow) and, similar to the EU
rules, it requires banks to take measures in case a minimum impairment coverage requirement is not met. Within the annual
SREP discussions ECB may impose Pillar 2 measures on banks in case ECB is not confident with measure taken by the
individual bank.

For the year end 2020, we introduced a framework to determine the prudential provisioning of non-performing exposure as a
Pillar 2 measure as requested in the before mentioned ECB’s guidance and SREP recommendation.

For the minimum loss coverage expectation for NPE´s arising from clients defaulted before April 1, 2018 (ECB – NPE Stock)
a phase-in path to 100 % coverage expectation was envisaged with an annual increase of 10 %. In a first step, banks were
allocated to three comparable groups on the basis of the bank’s net NPL ratios as of end-2017 and in a second step an
assessment of capacity regarding the potential impact was carried out for each individual bank with a horizon of end -2026.
Deutsche Bank has been assigned to Group 1 which requires a full applicability of 100 % minimum loss coverage by year end
2024 for secured loans respectively by year end 2023 for unsecured loans.

The shortfall between the minimum loss coverage requirements for non-performing exposure and the risk reserves recorded
in line with the IFRS 9 for defaulted (Stage 3) assets amounted to € 748 million as of December 31, 2021 and was deducted
from CET 1. This additional CET 1 charge can be considered as additional loss reserve and leads to a € 384 million RWA
relief.

Non-performing exposure loss coverage
                                                                                                                      Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                         Applicable
                                                                                         Total minimum                   amount of
in € m. (unless                                                                                coverage   Available     insufficient
stated otherwise)                                                       Exposure value     requirement    coverage        coverage
Corporate Bank                                                                  3,746             626       1,109              119
Investment Bank                                                                14,671           7,823      10,155              273
Private Bank                                                                    7,119           1,263       2,449              311
Asset Management                                                                    0               0           0                0
Capital Release Unit                                                              253             120         102               42
Corporate & Other                                                                  22               3           0                3
Total                                                                          25,811           9,835      13,816              748



                                                                                                                      Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                         Applicable
                                                                                         Total minimum                   amount of
in € m. (unless                                                                                coverage   Available     insufficient
stated otherwise)                                                       Exposure value     requirement    coverage        coverage
Corporate Bank                                                                  2,852             377       1,058               63
Investment Bank                                                                13,510           7,816      10,574              255
Private Bank                                                                    6,123           1,269       2,011              361
Asset Management                                                                    0               0           0                0
Capital Release Unit                                                              422             183         182               60
Corporate & Other                                                                   1               1           0                1
Total                                                                          22,907           9,646      13,825              740




                                                                                                                               124
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Development of risk-weighted assets
The table below provides an overview of RWA broken down by risk type and business division. It includes the aggregated
effects of the segmental reallocation of infrastructure related positions, if applicable, as well as reallocations between th e
segments.

Risk-weighted assets by risk type and business division
                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021
                                         Corporate            Investment               Private             Asset                Capital         Corporate &
in € m.                                      Bank                   Bank                 Bank         Management           Release Unit              Other              Total
Credit Risk                                59,588                93,125               77,632               11,017                 5,426             16,964         263,752
Settlement Risk                                 0                     1                    0                    0                    10                 49              60
Credit Valuation
Adjustment (CVA)                              120                4,879                   167                    9                1,098                  55           6,327
Market Risk                                   128               17,565                    40                   33                1,293                 715          19,773
Operational Risk                            5,571               25,031                 7,527                3,357               20,232                   0          61,718
Total                                      65,406              140,600                85,366               14,415               28,059              17,783         351,629



                                                                                                                                                               Dec 31, 2020 ¹
                                         Corporate            Investment               Private             Asset                Capital         Corporate &
in € m.                                      Bank                   Bank                 Bank         Management           Release Unit              Other              Total
Credit Risk                                50,995                70,550               68,353                 6,224                7,214             19,371         222,708
Settlement Risk                                 0                     0                    0                     0                    1                 54              56
Credit Valuation
Adjustment (CVA)                               75                6,302                    92                   198               1,599                 125           8,392
Market Risk                                   385               24,323                   548                    31               1,470               2,139          28,897
Operational Risk                            6,029               27,115                 8,081                 3,544              24,130                   0          68,899
Total                                      57,483              128,292                77,074                 9,997              34,415              21,690         328,951
1
    The divisional split for December 31, 2020 has been updated from the previous disclosures to reflect the current divisional structure.


Our RWA were € 351.6 billion as of December 31, 2021, compared to € 329.0 billion at the end of 2020. The increase of €
22.7 billion was primarily driven by credit risk RWA, which was partially offset by RWA for market risk, credit valuation
adjustment (CVA) risk and operational risk. The increase in credit risk RWA by € 41.0 billion was primarily driven by RWA
inflation from the European Central Bank’s Targeted Review of Internal Models (TRIM) which led to model refinements for
large corporates, banks/financial institutions and leveraged lending, amounting to € 15.5 billion, the CRR amendments
applicable as of June 28, 2021 amounting to € 6.3 billion and the introduction of the EBA Guideline on the new definition of
default amounting to € 8.1 billion as well as business growth within our core businesses. Additionally, our credit risk RWA
increased by € 6.4 billion due to foreign-exchange movements. This was partially offset by RWA decreases within our Capital
Release Unit due to the successful transfer of our Global Prime Finance and Electronic Equities platform to BNP Paribas and
Corporate & Other as well as impacts from Rating Migration. Market risk RWA decreased by € 9.1 billion and was primarily
driven by the VaR component due to the phase-out of the COVID-19 volatility and an update of the VaR/SVaR model.
Additionally, the decrease in RWA for the incremental risk charge displays the reduction in European sovereign bond
exposures. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in SVaR driven by the COVID-19 scenario and an increase
in the market risk standardized approach (covering securitizations, longevity and certain collective investment undertakings
(CIUs)). The phase-out of the COVID-19 volatility also brought a benefit to our CVA RWA which reduced by € 2.1 billion over
the last year. The operational risk RWA reduction of € 7.2 billion was mainly driven by a more favorable development of our
internal loss profile feeding into our capital model, partially offset by model related updates.

The tables below provide an analysis of key drivers for risk-weighted asset movements observed for credit risk, credit valuation
adjustments as well as market and operational risk in the reporting period. They also show the corresponding movements in
capital requirements, derived from the RWA by an 8 % capital ratio.

Development of risk-weighted assets for Credit Risk including Counterparty Credit Risk
                                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2021                         Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                 Capital                              Capital
in € m.                                                                                            Credit risk RWA         requirements      Credit risk RWA    requirements
Credit risk RWA balance, beginning of year                                                                222,708               17,817             221,060           17,685
Book size                                                                                                   4,719                  378               4,659              373
Book quality                                                                                                 (899)                 (72)              1,160               93
Model updates                                                                                                 (97)                  (8)             (2,072)            (166)
Methodology and policy                                                                                     30,172                2,414               6,542              523
Acquisition and disposals                                                                                     131                   10              (1,672)            (134)
Foreign exchange movements                                                                                  6,431                  514              (7,237)            (579)
Other                                                                                                         587                   47                 268               21
Credit risk RWA balance, end of year                                                                      263,752               21,100             222,708           17,817




                                                                                                                                                                         125
Deutsche Bank                                             Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                        Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Of which: Development of risk-weighted assets for Counterparty Credit Risk
                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                      Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                    Counterparty          Capital     Counterparty          Capital
in € m.                                                                           credit risk RWA   requirements    credit risk RWA   requirements
Counterparty credit risk RWA balance, beginning of year                                  23,814           1,905            23,698           1,896
Book size                                                                                (4,527)           (362)            1,784             143
Book quality                                                                               (422)            (34)             (594)            (48)
Model updates                                                                               125              10              (643)            (51)
Methodology and policy                                                                    4,805             384               669              54
Acquisition and disposals                                                                     0               0                 0               0
Foreign exchange movements                                                                  986              79            (1,100)            (88)
Other                                                                                         0               0                 0               0
Counterparty credit risk RWA balance, end of year                                        24,780           1,982            23,814           1,905



The classifications of key drivers for the RWA credit risk development table are fully aligned with the recommendations of the
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (EDTF). Organic changes in our portfolio size and composition are considered in the
category “book size”. The category “book quality” mainly represents the effects from portfolio rating migrations, loss given
default, model parameter recalibrations as well as collateral and netting coverage activities. “Model updates” include model
refinements and advanced model roll out. RWA movements resulting from externally, regulatory-driven changes, e.g. applying
new regulations, are considered in the “methodology and policy” section. “Acquisition and disposals” is reserved to show
significant exposure movements which can be clearly assigned to new businesses or disposal-related activities. Changes that
cannot be attributed to the above categories are reflected in the category “other”.

The increase in RWA for credit risk by 18.4 % or € 41.0 billion since December 31, 2020 is mainly driven by the categories
“methodology and policy”, “book size” as well as FX related movements along with marginal increase in the categories “other”
and “acquisition and disposals”. This is partially offset by changes shown in the categories “book quality” and “model updates”.
The category “methodology and policy” mainly reflects impacts driven by “Targeted Review of Internal Models TRIM” resulting
from regular ECB reviews of € 15.5 billion and updates from the introduction of the EBA Guideline on definition of default
amounting to € 8.1 billion as well as the CRR amendments applicable as of June 28, 2021 amounting to € 6.3 billion. The
increase in the category “book size” reflects business growth in our core business segments partly offset by reduction initiatives
in our Capital Release Unit. The decrease in category “book quality” includes reductions resulting from improved counterparty
ratings as well as favorable parameter developments and data enhancements.

The increase in counterparty credit risk is mainly driven by the increase in category “methodology and policy” resulting from
regular ECB reviews by way of TRIM addons as well as FX related movements. Further, an increase in category “model
updates” reflects enhancements of our internal models. This was offset by changes to category “book size” reflecting the
current market volatility as well as category “book quality” particularly stemming from rating change impacts.

Based on the CRR/CRD regulatory framework, we are required to calculate RWA using the CVA which takes into account the
credit quality of our counterparties. RWA for CVA covers the risk of mark-to-market losses on the expected counterparty risk
in connection with OTC derivative exposures. We calculate the majority of the CVA based on our own internal model as
approved by the BaFin.

Development of risk-weighted assets for Credit Valuation Adjustment
                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                      Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                          Capital                           Capital
in € m.                                                                                CVA RWA      requirements        CVA RWA       requirements
CVA RWA balance, beginning of year                                                        8,392             671             4,683             374
Movement in risk levels                                                                    (449)            (36)           (3,338)           (267)
Market data changes and recalibrations                                                   (1,581)           (126)                0               0
Model updates                                                                                 0               0             5,787             463
Methodology and policy                                                                        0               0             1,260             101
Acquisitions and disposals                                                                  (33)              3                 0               0
Foreign exchange movements                                                                    0               0                 0               0
CVA RWA balance, end of year                                                              6,329             506             8,392             671


The development of CVA RWA is broken down into a number of categories: “Movement in risk levels”, which includes changes
to the portfolio size and composition; “Market data changes and calibrations”, which includes changes in market data levels
and volatilities as well as recalibrations; “Model updates” refers to changes to either the IMM credit exposure models or the
value-at-risk models that are used for CVA RWA; “Methodology and policy” relates to changes to the regulation. Any significant
business acquisitions or disposals would be presented in the category with that name.

As of December 31, 2021, the RWA for CVA amounted to € 6.3 billion, representing a decrease of € 2.1 billion or (25 %)
compared to December 31, 2020. The overall decrease was primarily driven by market data changes as a result of a change
in the VaR window in Q2, where volatility from March and April 2020 rolled out of CVA RWA calculations; market data changes


                                                                                                                                               126
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




also incorporates the improved hedging strategy implemented to incorporate the shift in the VaR period. Additional decreases
also materialized through enhancements in risk representation resulting in improved calculation inputs.

Development of risk-weighted assets for Market Risk
                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                         Total capital
in € m.                                                VaR            SVaR                   IRC             Other         Total RWA    requirements
Market risk RWA balance, beginning of year          12,109            6,983             7,005               2,799             28,897          2,312
 Movement in risk levels                            (1,067)             537            (3,349)                 28             (3,850)          (308)
 Market data changes and recalibrations             (4,943)               0                 0                 334             (4,609)          (369)
 Model updates/changes                              (2,196)           2,675                 0                   0                479             38
 Methodology and policy                               (366)            (835)                0                   0             (1,201)           (96)
 Acquisitions and disposals                              0                0                 0                   0                  0              0
 Foreign exchange movements                              0                0                 0                  57                 57              5
 Other                                                   0                0                 0                   0                  0              0
Market risk RWA balance, end of year                 3,538            9,360             3,657               3,219             19,773          1,582



                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                         Total capital
in € m.                                                VaR            SVaR                   IRC             Other         Total RWA    requirements
Market risk RWA balance, beginning of year           4,273          13,734              4,868               2,493             25,368          2,029
 Movement in risk levels                            (4,775)         (2,397)             2,698                 570             (3,902)          (311)
 Market data changes and recalibrations              4,237               0                  0                (131)             4,105            328
 Model updates/changes                                (107)            547               (561)                  0               (121)           (10)
 Methodology and policy                              8,481          (4,901)                 0                 (15)             3,565            285
 Acquisitions and disposals                              0               0                  0                   0                  0              0
 Foreign exchange movements                              0               0                  0                (118)              (118)            (9)
 Other                                                   0               0                  0                   0                  0              0
Market risk RWA balance, end of year                12,109           6,983              7,005               2,799             28,897          2,312


The analysis for market risk covers movements in our internal models for value-at-risk (VaR), stressed value-at-risk (SVaR),
incremental risk charge (IRC) as well as results from the market risk standardized approach (MRSA), which is captured in the
table under the category “Other”. MRSA is used to determine the regulatory capital charge for the specific market risk of
trading book securitizations, for certain types of investment funds and for longevity risk as set out in CRR/CRD regulations.

The market risk RWA movements due to changes in market data levels, volatilities, correlations, liquidity and ratings are
included under the “Market data changes and recalibrations” category. Changes to our market risk RWA internal models, such
as methodology enhancements or risk scope extensions, are included in the category of “Model updates”. In the “Methodology
and policy” category we reflect regulatory driven changes to our market risk RWA models and calculations. Significant new
businesses and disposals would be assigned to the line item “Acquisition and disposals”. The impacts of “Foreign exchange
movements” are only calculated for the CRM and Standardized approach methods.

As of December 31, 2021 the RWA for market risk was € 19.8 billion which has decreased by € 9.1 billion (-31 %) since
December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by the “Market data changes and recalibrations” category across value-at-risk
driven by the COVID-19 related market volatility rolling out of the value-at-risk window and by the “Methodology and policy”
category driven by the reduction in capital multiplier from 4.5 to 4, based on closure of audit findings from Joint Supervisory
Team (JST) on Historical Simulation value-at-risk. The decrease in incremental risk charge was driven by reduction in
European sovereign bond exposures.

Development of risk-weighted assets for operational risk
                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021                         Dec 31, 2020
                                                                          Operational risk               Capital     Operational risk         Capital
in € m.                                                                            RWA             requirements               RWA       requirements
Operational risk RWA balance, beginning of year                                  68,899                  5,512              72,662             5,813
Loss profile changes (internal and external)                                     (8,000)                  (640)             (4,677)             (374)
Expected loss development                                                          (113)                    (9)              1,164                93
Forward looking risk component                                                     (278)                   (22)                533                43
Model updates                                                                     1,210                     97                (784)              (63)
Methodology and policy                                                                0                      0                   0                 0
Acquisitions and disposals                                                            0                      0                   0                 0
Operational risk RWA balance, end of year                                        61,718                  4,937              68,899             5,512


Changes in internal and external loss events are reflected in the category “Loss profile changes”. The category “Expected loss
development” is based on divisional business plans as well as historical losses and is deducted from the AMA capital figure
within certain constraints. The category “Forward looking risk component” reflects qualitative adjustments and, as such, the
effectiveness and performance of the day-to-day operational risk management activities via NFR appetite metrics and RCA



                                                                                                                                                  127
Deutsche Bank                                                          Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                     Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




scores, focusing on the business environment and internal control factors. The category “Model updates” covers model
refinements, such as the implementation of model changes. The category “Methodology and policy” represents externally
driven changes such as regulatory add-ons. The category “Acquisition and disposals” represents significant exposure
movements which can be clearly assigned to new or disposed businesses.

The overall RWA decrease of € 7.2 billion was mainly driven by a lighter internal loss profile, in particular lower loss frequencies
feeding into our capital model. These loss profile changes reduced our RWA for Operational Risk by € 8.0 billion.

A minor loss deductible increase lead to an RWA decrease of € 0.1 billion while the forward looking component was impacted
by slightly stronger NFR appetite metrics and RCA scores, resulting in an RWA decrease of € 0.3 billion.

The RWA increase of € 1.2 billion from model updates was driven by two changes. First, the wider use of NFR appetite metrics
as key risk indicators lead to a higher precision of the forward looking risk component. A second model enhancement was
made to make the model more robust in the treatment of risk event types with scarce internal losses.


Economic Capital
Economic capital adequacy

Our internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) aims at maintaining the continuity of Deutsche Bank on an ongoing
basis. We assess our internal capital adequacy from an economic perspective as the ratio of our economic capital supply
divided by our internal economic capital demand as shown in the table below.

Total economic capital supply and demand
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                                                         Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
Components of economic capital supply
  Shareholders' equity                                                                                                                                 58,027                54,786
  Noncontrolling interests¹                                                                                                                               858                   880
  AT1 coupons deduction                                                                                                                                  (298)                 (242)
  Gain on sale of securitizations, cash flow hedges                                                                                                        42                   (11)
  Fair value gains on own debt and debt valuation adjustments, subject to own credit risk                                                                 (56)                 (100)
  Additional valuation adjustments                                                                                                                     (1,812)               (1,430)
  Intangible assets                                                                                                                                    (3,583)               (3,463)
  IFRS deferred tax assets excl. temporary differences                                                                                                 (1,653)               (1,503)
  Expected loss shortfall                                                                                                                                (573)                  (99)
  Defined benefit pension fund assets                                                                                                                    (991)                 (772)
  Other adjustments²                                                                                                                                   (1,492)               (1,566)
  Additional tier 1 equity instruments³                                                                                                                     0                 4,659
Economic capital supply                                                                                                                                48,470                51,138

Components of economic capital demand
    Credit risk                                                                                                                                        11,725                11,636
    Market risk                                                                                                                                         7,920                10,894
    Operational risk                                                                                                                                    4,937                 5,512
    Strategic risk4                                                                                                                                     3,173                 5,949
    Diversification benefit                                                                                                                            (4,213)               (5,429)
Total economic capital demand                                                                                                                          23,542                28,560

Economic capital adequacy ratio                                                                                                                         206 %                 179 %
1
    Includes noncontrolling interest up to the economic capital requirement for each subsidiary.
2
    Includes € 1.1 billion capital deduction based on ECB guidance on irrevocable payment commitments related to the Single Resolution Fund and the Deposit Guarantee
    Scheme. Capital deductions of € 0.7 billion, based on regular ECB review have been released from December 2021 due to remediation.
3
    Additional Tier 1 equity instruments were completely de-recognized from economic capital supply from December 2021 onwards.
4
    Formerly reported as business risk. This category includes the model output for strategic risk and tax risk, as well as capital charges for risk related to IFRS deferred tax
    assets on temporary differences and software assets.


The economic capital adequacy ratio was 206 % as of December 31, 2021, compared with 179 % as of December 31, 2020.
The change in the ratio was mainly due to a decrease in capital demand, which was partially offset by lower capital supply.
The economic capital supply decreased by € 2.7 billion and was primarily driven by the decision to completely de-recognize €
4.7 billion of additional tier 1 equity instruments from economic capital supply and the increase in capital deductions mainly
from higher expected loss shortfall of € 0.5 billion, prudential filters (additional value adjustment) of € 0.4 billion and irrevocable
payment commitments related to the Single Resolution Fund and the Deposit Guarantee Scheme of € 0.2 billion. These
decreases were partly offset by our positive net income of € 2.4 billion, release of regulatory capital deductions of € 0.7 billion
and other offsetting items. The decrease in capital demand was driven by lower economic capital demand as explained in the
section “Risk Profile”.




                                                                                                                                                                                    128
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                               Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Leverage Ratio
We manage our balance sheet on a Group level and, where applicable, locally in each region. In the allocation of financial
resources, we favor business portfolios with the highest positive impact on our profitability and shareholder value. We monitor
and analyze balance sheet developments and track certain market-observed balance sheet ratios. Based on this we trigger
discussion and management action by the Group Risk Committee (GRC).

Leverage Ratio according to CRR/CRD framework

The non-risk-based leverage ratio is intended to act as a supplementary measure to the risk-based capital requirements. Its
objectives are to constrain the build-up of leverage in the banking sector, helping avoid destabilizing deleveraging processes
which can damage the broader financial system and the economy, and to reinforce the risk-based requirements with a simple,
non-risk based “backstop” measure.

A minimum leverage ratio requirement of 3 % was introduced effective starting with June 28, 2021. From January 1, 2023 an
additional leverage ratio buffer requirement of 50 % of the applicable G-SII buffer rate will apply. It is currently expected that
this additional requirement will equal 0.75 % for Deutsche Bank.

We calculate our leverage ratio exposure in accordance with Articles 429 to 429g of the CRR.

Our total leverage ratio exposure includes derivatives, securities financing transactions (SFTs), off-balance sheet exposure
and other on-balance sheet exposure (excluding derivatives and SFTs).

The leverage exposure for derivatives is calculated by using a modified version of the standardized approach for counterparty
credit risk (SA-CCR), comprising the current replacement cost plus a regulatory defined add-on for the potential future
exposure. The effective notional amount of written credit derivatives, i.e., the notional reduced by any negative fair value
changes that have been incorporated in Tier 1 capital is included in the leverage ratio exposure measure; the resulting
exposure measure is further reduced by the effective notional amount of purchased credit derivative protection on the same
reference name provided certain conditions are met.

The securities financing transaction (SFT) component includes the gross receivables for SFTs, which are netted with SFT
payables if specific conditions are met. In addition to the gross exposure a regulatory add-on for the counterparty credit risk is
included.

The off-balance sheet exposure component follows the credit risk conversion factors (CCF) of the standardized approach for
credit risk (0 %, 20 %, 50 %, or 100 %), which depend on the risk category subject to a floor of 10 %.

The on-balance sheet exposures (excluding derivatives and SFTs) component reflects the accounting values of the assets
(excluding derivatives, SFTs and regular-way purchases and sales awaiting settlement) as well as regulatory adjustments for
asset amounts deducted in determining Tier 1 capital. The exposure value of regular-way purchases and sales awaiting
settlement is determined as offset between those cash receivables and cash payables where the related regular-way sales
and purchases are both settlement on a delivery-versus payment basis.

Certain Euro-based exposures facing Eurosystem central banks may be excluded from the leverage exposure subject to
having obtained permission from the European Central Bank. Based on Decision (EU) 2020/1306 of the European Central
Bank, the Group was allowed for the first time in the September 30, 2020 reporting to exclude these exposures from the
leverage exposure. This exclusion did apply until June 27, 2021. Decision (EU) 2021/1074 of the European Central Bank
extends the exemption of certain Euro-based exposures facing Eurosystem central banks until March 31, 2022.




                                                                                                                             129
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                  Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




The following tables show the leverage ratio exposure and the leverage ratio. The Leverage ratio common disclosure table
provides the leverage ratio on a fully loaded and phase-in basis with the fully loaded and phase-in Tier 1 Capital, respectively,
in the numerator. For further details on Tier 1 capital please also refer to the section “Development of Own Funds”.

Summary reconciliation of accounting assets and leverage ratio exposures
in € bn.                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020
Total assets as per published financial statements                                                                                                 1,324                1,325
  Adjustment for entities which are consolidated for accounting purposes but are outside the scope of
  regulatory consolidation                                                                                                                              1                   1
  Adjustments for derivative financial instruments                                                                                                   (163)               (206)
  Adjustment for securities financing transactions (SFTs)                                                                                               2                  10
  Adjustment for off-balance sheet items (i.e. conversion to credit equivalent amounts of off-balance
  sheet exposures)                                                                                                                                   115                  101
  Other adjustments                                                                                                                                 (154)                (153)
Leverage ratio total exposure measure                                                                                                              1,125                1,078



Leverage ratio common disclosure
in € bn.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021²      Dec 31, 2020¹,²
Total derivative exposures                                                                                                                            138                 141
Total securities financing transaction exposures                                                                                                       91                  83
Total off-balance sheet exposures                                                                                                                     115                 101
Other Assets                                                                                                                                          791                 761
Asset amounts deducted in determining Tier 1 capital                                                                                                   (9)                 (8)

Tier 1 capital (fully loaded)                                                                                                                       54.8                 50.6
Leverage ratio total exposure measure                                                                                                              1,125                1,078
Leverage ratio (fully loaded, in %)                                                                                                                   4.9                  4.7

Tier 1 capital (phase-in)                                                                                                                           55.4                 51.7
Leverage ratio total exposure measure                                                                                                              1,125                1,078
Leverage ratio (phase-in, in %)                                                                                                                       4.9                  4.8
1
    The Tier 1 capital and related ratios for December 31, 2020 have been updated to reflect a dividend payment of zero.
2
    Following additional EBA guidance, deductions of receivables assets for cash variation margin provided in derivatives transactions were moved to “Other Assets” from “Total
    derivative exposures”.


Description of the factors that had an impact on the leverage ratio in 2021

As of December 31, 2021, our fully loaded leverage ratio was 4.9 % compared to 4.7 % as of December 31, 2020. This takes,
into account a fully loaded Tier 1 capital of € 54.8 billion over an applicable exposure measure of € 1,125 billion as of
December 31, 2021 (€ 50.6 billion and € 1,078 billion as of December 31, 2020, respectively).

Over the year 2021, our leverage exposure increased by € 46 billion to € 1,125 billion, largely driven by the leverage exposure
for the remaining asset items which increased by € 30 billion. This reflects the development of our balance sheet (for additional
information please refer to section “Movements in assets and liabilities” in this report) and certain impacts from the CRR
amendments effective June 28, 2021: the loan growth on the balance sheet as well as impacts from the CRR amendments
resulted in an increase by € 52 billion and cash and central bank/interbank balances increased by € 11 billion. Pending
settlements increased by € 2 billion on a net basis - despite being € 6 billion higher on a gross basis. These increases were
partly offset by Financial assets at fair value through OCI which decreased by € 27 billion and non-derivative trading assets
which decreased by € 6 billion. Off-balance sheet leverage exposures increased by € 13 billion corresponding to higher
notional amounts for irrevocable lending commitments and the impact of the CRR amendments. Furthermore, SFT-related
items (securities purchased under resale agreements, securities borrowed and receivables from prime brokerage) increased
by € 8 billion, in line with the development on the balance sheet. In addition, the leverage exposure related to derivatives
decreased by € 3 billion.

The increase in leverage exposure in 2021 included a positive foreign exchange impact of € 35 billion mainly due to the
strengthening of the U.S. Dollar versus the Euro. The effects from foreign exchange rate movements are embedded in the
movement of the leverage exposure items discussed in this section.

As of December 31, 2021, our leverage ratio according to transitional provisions was 4.9 % (4.8 % as of December 31, 2020),
calculated as Tier 1 capital according to transitional rules of € 55.4 billion over an applicable exposure measure of € 1,125
billion (€ 51.7 billion and € 1,078 billion as of December 31, 2020, respectively).




                                                                                                                                                                           130
Deutsche Bank                                  Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                             Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




We exclude certain central bank exposures in the amount of € 99 billion as of December 31, 2021, based on Article 429a (1)
(n) CRR and the ECB Decision 2021/1074. As we make use of this exemption, Article 429a (7) CRR specifies that the
applicable minimum leverage ratio must be increased to 3.2 %. Note that until the first quarter of 2021 a similar exemption
applied based on Article 500b CRR. Not applying the temporary exclusion of certain central bank exposures our leverage
exposure was € 1,223 billion as of December 31, 2021, corresponding to a leverage ratio of 4.5 % on a fully loaded basis and
on a phase-in basis.

For main drivers of the Tier 1 capital development please refer to section “Development of Own Funds”.


Minimum Requirement of Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (“MREL”) and Total
Loss Absorbing Capacity (“TLAC”)
MREL Requirements

The minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (“MREL”) requirement was introduced by the European Union’s
Regulation establishing uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions (Single Resolution
Mechanism Regulation or “SRMR”) and the European Union’s Directive establishing a framework for the recovery and
resolution of credit institutions (Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive or “BRRD”) as implemented into German law by the
German Recovery and Resolution Act.

The currently required level of MREL is determined by the competent resolution authorities for each supervised bank
individually on a case-by-case basis, depending on the respective preferred resolution strategy. In the case of Deutsche Bank
AG, MREL is determined by the Single Resolution Board (“SRB”). While there is no statutory minimum level of MREL, the
SRMR, BRRD and a delegated regulation set out criteria which the resolution authority must consider when determining the
relevant required level of MREL. Guidance is provided through an MREL policy published annually by the SRB. Any binding
MREL ratio determined by the SRB is communicated to Deutsche Bank via the German Federal Financial Supervisory
Authority (BaFin).

In the last quarter of 2019, Deutsche Bank AG’s binding MREL ratio requirement on a consolidated basis has been set at
8.58 % of Total Liabilities and Own Funds (“TLOF”) applicable immediately of which 6.11 % of TLOF have to be meet with
own funds and subordinated instruments as an additional requirement. TLOF principally consists of total liabilities after
derivatives netting, plus own funds, i.e., regulatory capital.

As a result of its regular annual review, the SRB has revised Deutsche Bank AG’s binding MREL ratio requirement in the last
quarter of 2021 applicable immediately. These new requirements for the first time reflect the legal changes of the banking
reform package via amendments to the SRMR and the BRRD provided in June 2019 with the publication of Regulation (EU)
2019/877 and Directive (EU) 2019/879. As a result, the MREL and subordinated MREL requirement will no longer be
expressed as a percentage of TLOF but as a percentage of Risk Weighted Assets (“RWA”) and Leverage Ratio Exposure
(“LRE”). The MREL ratio requirement on a consolidated basis is now 24.05 % of RWA and 6.88 % of LRE of which 20.27 %
of RWA and 6.88 % of LRE must be met with own funds and subordinated instruments. The combined buffer requirements of
4.53 % as of December 31, 2021 must be met in addition to the RWA based MREL and subordinated MREL requirements.

TLAC Requirements

Since June 27, 2019, Deutsche Bank, as a global systemically important bank, has also become subject to global minimum
standards for its Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (“TLAC”). The TLAC requirement was implemented via amendments to the
Capital Requirements Regulation and the Capital Requirements Directive provided in June 2019 with the publication of
Regulation (EU) 2019/876 and Directive (EU) 2019/878.

This TLAC requirement is based on both risk-based and non-risk-based denominators and set at the higher-of 16 % of RWA
plus the combined buffer requirements and 6.00 % of LRE for a transition period until December 31, 2021. Since January 1,
2022, the requirement is set at the higher-of 18 % of RWA plus the combined buffer requirements and 6.75 % of LRE.




                                                                                                                        131
Deutsche Bank                                                     Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




MREL ratio development

As of December 31, 2021, available MREL were € 114.9 billion, corresponding to a ratio of 32.66 % of RWA. This means that
Deutsche Bank has a comfortable MREL surplus of € 14.4 billion above our MREL requirement of € 100.5 billion (i.e. 28.58 %
of RWA including combined buffer requirement). € 109.1 billion of our available MREL were own funds and subordinated
liabilities, corresponding to a MREL subordination ratio of 31.03 % of RWA, a buffer of € 21.9 billion over our subordination
requirement of € 87.2 billion (i.e. 24.79 % of RWA including combined buffer requirements). Compared to December 31, 2020
the surpluses above both our MREL requirement and our subordinated MREL requirement have been reduced mainly through
the change in the MREL requirement setting legislation and methodology described above. This was partially offset by an
increase in our MREL capacity from new issuances of own funds and eligible liabilities which more than offset roll -offs and
methodology changes in the measurement basis. These developments also impacted our TLAC ratio.

TLAC ratio development

As of December 31, 2021, TLAC was € 109.1 billion and the corresponding TLAC ratios were 31.03 % of RWA and 9.70 % of
LRE. This means that Deutsche Bank has a comfortable TLAC surplus of € 36.9 billion over its TLAC requirement of € 72.2
billion (20.53 % of RWA including combined buffer requirements).

MREL and TLAC disclosure
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Regulatory capital elements of TLAC/MREL
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET 1)                                                                                                        46,506        44,885
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital instruments eligible under TLAC/MREL                                                                         8,868         6,848
Tier 2 (T2) capital instruments eligible under TLAC/MREL
      Tier 2 (T2) capital instruments before TLAC/MREL adjustments                                                                           7,358         6,944
      Tier 2 (T2) capital instruments adjustments for TLAC/MREL                                                                              1,208           518
Tier 2 (T2) capital instruments eligible under TLAC/MREL                                                                                     8,566         7,462
Total regulatory capital elements of TLAC/MREL                                                                                              63,941        59,195

Other elements of TLAC/MREL
Senior non-preferred plain vanilla                                                                                                         45,153         46,048
Holdings of eligible liabilities instruments of other G-SIIs (TLAC only)                                                                        0              0
Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC)                                                                                                      109,094        105,243
Add back of holdings of eligible liabilities instruments of other G-SIIs (TLAC only)                                                            0              0
Available Own Funds and subordinated Eligible Liabilities (subordinated MREL)                                                             109,094        105,243
Senior preferred plain vanilla                                                                                                              5,759          3,658
Available Minimum Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL)                                                                               114,853        108,901

Risk Weighted Assets (RWA)                                                                                                                351,629        328,951
Leverage Ratio Exposure (LRE)                                                                                                           1,124,667      1,078,277
Total liabilities and own funds after prudential netting (TLOF)                                                                                 -      1,018,744

TLAC ratio
TLAC ratio (as percentage of RWA)                                                                                                            31.03         31.99
TLAC requirement (as percentage of RWA)                                                                                                      20.53         20.52
TLAC ratio (as percentage of Leverage Exposure)                                                                                               9.70          9.76
TLAC requirement (as percentage of Leverage Exposure)                                                                                         6.00          6.00
TLAC surplus over RWA requirement                                                                                                           36,919        37,747
TLAC surplus over LRE requirement                                                                                                           41,614        40,547

MREL subordination
MREL subordination ratio (%)¹                                                                                                                31.03         10.33
MREL subordination requirement (%)¹                                                                                                          24.79          6.11
Surplus over MREL subordination requirement                                                                                                 21,909        42,998

MREL ratio
MREL ratio (%)¹                                                                                                                              32.66         10.69
MREL requirement (%)¹                                                                                                                        28.58          8.58
MREL surplus over requirement                                                                                                               14,372        21,493
1
    For Dec 31, 2021 as percentage of RWA (requirement including the combined buffer requirement) and for Dec 31, 2020 as percentage of TLOF.




                                                                                                                                                              132
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                Capital, Leverage Ratio, TLAC and MREL




Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities

To meet the MREL and TLAC requirement, Deutsche Bank needs to ensure that a sufficient amount of eligible liabilities
instruments is maintained. Instruments eligible for MREL and TLAC are regulatory capital instruments (“own funds”) and
liabilities that meet certain criteria, which are referred to as eligible liabilities.

Own funds used for MREL and TLAC include the full amount of Tier 2 capital instruments with a remaining maturity of greater
than 1 year and less than 5 years which are reflected in regulatory capital on a pro-rata basis only.

Eligible liabilities are liabilities issued out of the resolution entity Deutsche Bank AG that meet eligibility criteria which are
supposed to ensure that they are structurally suited as loss-absorbing capital. As a result, eligible liabilities exclude deposits
which are covered by an insurance deposit protection scheme or which are preferred under German insolvency law (e.g.,
deposits from private individuals as well as small and medium-sized enterprises). Among other things, secured liabilities and
derivatives liabilities are generally excluded as well. Debt instruments with embedded derivative features can be included
under certain conditions (e.g. a known and fixed or increasing principal). In addition, eligible liabilities must have a rema ining
time to maturity of at least one year and must either be issued under the law of a Member State of the European Union or
must include a bail-in clause in their contractual terms to make write-down or conversion effective. The SRB has granted a
transitional period for liabilities issued under UK law on or before November 15, 2018, which do not include an enforceable
and effective bail-in clause but can still be included in eligible liabilities after Brexit until June 28, 2025.

In addition, eligible liabilities need to be subordinated to be counted against the TLAC and MREL subordination requirements.
Effective January 1, 2017, the German Banking Act provided for a new class of statutorily subordinated debt securities that
rank as “senior non-preferred” below the bank’s other senior liabilities (but in priority to the bank’s contractually subordinated
liabilities, such as those qualifying as Tier 2 instruments). Following a harmonization effort by the European Union implemented
in Germany effective July 21, 2018, banks are permitted to now decide if a specific issuance of eligible senior debt will be in
the non-preferred or in the preferred category. Any such “senior non-preferred” debt instruments issued by Deutsche Bank
AG under such rules rank on parity with its outstanding debt instruments that were classified as “senior non-preferred” under
the prior rules. All of these “senior non-preferred” issuances meet the TLAC and MREL subordination criteria.




                                                                                                                              133
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




Credit Risk Exposure
We define our credit exposure by taking into account all transactions where losses might occur due to the fact that
counterparties may not fulfill their contractual payment obligations as defined under ‘Credit Risk Framework’.


Maximum Exposure to Credit Risk
The maximum exposure to credit risk table shows the direct exposure before consideration of associated collateral held and
other credit enhancements (netting and hedges) that do not qualify for offset in our financial statements for the periods
specified. The netting credit enhancement component includes the effects of legally enforceable netting agreements as well
as the offset of negative mark-to-markets from derivatives against pledged cash collateral. The collateral credit enhancement
component mainly includes real estate, collateral in the form of cash as well as securities-related collateral. In relation to
collateral we apply internally determined haircuts and additionally cap all collateral values at the level of the respective
collateralized exposure.

Maximum Exposure to Credit Risk
                                                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                       Credit Enhancements
                                                               Maximum                                                                      Guarantees
                                                               exposure            Subject to                                                and Credit        Total credit
in € m.                                                    to credit risk1        impairment               Netting            Collateral    derivatives2    enhancements
Financial assets at amortized cost³
   Cash and central bank balances                              192,025              192,025                      −                     0              −                  0
   Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                        7,345                7,345                      −                     0              0                  0
   Central bank funds sold and securities
   purchased under resale agreements                             8,370                8,370                    −                8,070               −              8,070
   Securities borrowed                                              63                   63                    −                   63               −                 63
   Loans                                                       476,077              476,077                    −              247,109          33,353            280,462
   Other assets subject to credit risk4,5                       83,314               79,361               30,639                  709             206             31,555
Total financial assets at amortized cost³                      767,193              763,240               30,639              255,951          33,559            320,150
Financial assets at fair value through profit
or loss6
   Trading assets                                               97,080                      −                    −                  2,217        1,091              3,308
   Positive market values from derivative
   financial instruments                                       299,732                      −            238,411                41,692              37           280,140
   Non-trading financial assets mandatory
   at fair value through profit or loss                         87,873                      −               2,176               75,960             187            78,324
      Of which:
      Securities purchased under resale
      agreement                                                 59,931                      −               2,176               57,755               0            59,931
      Securities borrowed                                       18,355                      −                   −               17,978               0            17,978
      Loans                                                        895                      −                   −                  190             187               378
   Financial assets designated at fair value
   through profit or loss                                           140                     −                    −                     0            82                  82
Total financial assets at fair value through
profit or loss                                                 484,825                    −              240,587              119,869            1,398           361,854
Financial assets at fair value through OCI                      28,979               28,979                    0                1,480              891             2,371
   Of which:
   Securities purchased under resale
   agreement                                                      1,231                1,231                     −                      0            0                  0
   Securities borrowed                                                0                    0                     −                      0            0                  0
   Loans                                                          4,370                4,370                     −                  1,480          891              2,371
Total financial assets at fair value through
OCI                                                             28,979               28,979                      −                  1,480          891              2,371
Financial guarantees and other credit
related contingent liabilities⁷                                 59,394               59,394                      −                  3,077        6,857              9,934
Revocable and irrevocable lending
commitments and other credit related
commitments⁷                                                   227,132              226,454                      −              18,545          5,888             24,433
Total off-balance sheet                                        286,525              285,848                      −              21,622         12,746             34,368

Maximum exposure to credit risk                              1,567,522            1,078,067              271,227              398,922          48,593            718,742
1
    Does not include credit derivative notional sold (€ 491,407 million) and credit derivative notional bought protection.
2
    Bought Credit protection is reflected with the notional of the underlying.
3
    All amounts at gross value before deductions of allowance for credit losses.
4
    All amounts at amortized cost (gross) except for qualifying hedge derivatives, which are reflected at Fair value through P&L.
5
    Includes Asset Held for Sale regardless of accounting classification.
6
    Excludes equities, other equity interests and commodities.
7
    Figures are reflected at notional amounts.




                                                                                                                                                                       134
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                       Credit Enhancements
                                                               Maximum                                                                      Guarantees
                                                               exposure            Subject to                                                and Credit        Total credit
in € m.                                                    to credit risk1        impairment               Netting            Collateral    derivatives2    enhancements
Financial assets at amortized cost³
   Cash and central bank balances                              166,211              166,211                      −                     0              −                  0
   Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                        9,132                9,132                      −                     0              0                  0
   Central bank funds sold and securities
   purchased under resale agreements                             8,535                8,535                    −                8,173               −              8,173
   Securities borrowed                                               0                    0                    −                    0               −                  0
   Loans                                                       431,807              431,807                    −              228,513          30,119            258,632
   Other assets subject to credit risk4,5                       96,394               85,106               43,316                  902              55             44,273
Total financial assets at amortized cost³                      712,078              700,790               43,316              237,588          30,174            311,078
Financial assets at fair value through profit
or loss⁶
   Trading assets                                               94,757                      −                    −                  2,998        1,248              4,246
   Positive market values from derivative
   financial instruments                                       343,455                      −            262,486                52,329              83           314,898
   Non-trading financial assets mandatory
   at fair value through profit or loss                         75,116                      −                 993               62,036             244            63,273
      Of which:
      Securities purchased under resale
      agreement                                                 46,057                      −                 993               44,967               0            45,961
      Securities borrowed                                       17,009                      −                   −               16,730               0            16,730
      Loans                                                      2,192                      −                   −                  272             244               516
   Financial assets designated at fair value
   through profit or loss                                           437                     −                    −                     0              0                  0
Total financial assets at fair value through
profit or loss                                                 513,764                    −              263,479              117,364            1,575           382,418
Financial assets at fair value through OCI                      55,834               55,834                    0                1,581            1,153             2,734
   Of which:
   Securities purchased under resale
   agreement                                                      1,543                1,543                     −                      0            0                  0
   Securities borrowed                                                0                    0                     −                      0            0                  0
   Loans                                                          4,635                4,635                     −                  1,581        1,153              2,734
Total financial assets at fair value through
OCI                                                             55,834               55,834                      −                  1,581        1,153              2,734
Financial guarantees and other credit
related contingent liabilities⁷                                 47,978               47,978                      −                  2,327        6,157              8,484
Revocable and irrevocable lending
commitments and other credit related
commitments⁷                                                   215,877              214,898                      −              15,345          5,779             21,124
Total off-balance sheet                                        263,854              262,876                      −              17,672         11,936             29,608

Maximum exposure to credit risk                              1,545,531            1,019,501              306,795              374,205          44,838            725,838
1
    Does not include credit derivative notional sold (€ 395,636 million) and credit derivative notional bought protection.
2
    Bought Credit protection is reflected with the notional of the underlying.
3
    All amounts at gross value before deductions of allowance for credit losses.
4
    All amounts at amortized cost (gross) except for qualifying hedge derivatives, which are reflected at Fair value through P&L.
5
    Includes Asset Held for Sale regardless of accounting classification.
6
    Excludes equities, other equity interests and commodities.
7
    Figures are reflected at notional amounts.


The overall increase in maximum exposure to credit risk for December 31, 2021 was € 22.0 billion mainly driven by an increase
of € 44.3 billion in loans at amortized cost, € 24.0 billion in cash and central bank and interbank balances, € 14.8 billion in
central bank funds sold, securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed across all applicable
measurement categories and € 22.7 billion in irrevocable commitments and financial guarantees. These increases were offset
by reductions in positive market values from derivatives by € 43.7 billion, financial assets at fair value through other
comprehensive income by € 26.9 billion mainly in debt securities and other assets subject to credit risk by € 13.0 billion.

Included in the category of trading assets as of December 31, 2021, were traded bonds of € 85.5 billion (€ 83.5 billion as of
December 31, 2020) of which over 83 % were investment-grade (over 84 % as of December 31, 2020).

Credit Enhancements are split into three categories: netting, collateral and guarantees / credit derivatives. Haircuts, parameter
setting for regular margin calls as well as expert judgments for collateral valuation are employed to prevent market
developments from leading to a build-up of uncollateralized exposures. All categories are monitored and reviewed regularly.
Overall credit enhancements received are diversified and of adequate quality being largely cash, highly rated government
bonds and third-party guarantees mostly from well rated banks and insurance companies. These financial institutions are
domiciled mainly in European countries and the United States. Furthermore, we have collateral pools of highly liquid assets
and mortgages (principally consisting of residential properties mainly in Germany) for the homogeneous retail portfolio.




                                                                                                                                                                       135
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




Main Credit Exposure Categories
The tables in this section show details about several of our main credit exposure categories, namely Loans, Revocable and
Irrevocable Lending Commitments, Contingent Liabilities, Over-The-Counter (“OTC”) Derivatives, Debt Securities and Repo
and repo-style transactions:

– “Loans” are gross loans as reported on our balance sheet at amortized cost, loans at fair value through profit and loss and
  loans at fair value through other comprehensive income before deduction of allowance for credit losses. This includes
  “Traded loans” that are bought and held for the purpose of selling them in the near term, or the material risks of which have
  all been hedged or sold. From a regulatory perspective the latter category principally covers trading book positions.
– “Revocable and irrevocable lending commitments” consist of the undrawn portion of revocable and irrevocable lending-
  related commitments.
– “Contingent liabilities” consist of financial and performance guarantees, standby letters of credit and other similar
  arrangements (mainly indemnity agreements).
– “OTC derivatives” are our credit exposures from over-the-counter derivative transactions that we have entered into, after
  netting and cash collateral received. On our balance sheet, these are included in financial assets at fair value through profit
  or loss or, for derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting, in other assets, in either case only applying cash collateral
  received and netting eligible under IFRS.
– “Debt securities” include debentures, bonds, deposits, notes or commercial paper, which are issued for a fixed term and
  redeemable by the issuer, as reported on our balance sheet within accounting categories at amortized cost and at fair value
  through other comprehensive income before deduction of allowance for credit losses, it also includes category at fair value
  through profit and loss. This includes “Traded bonds”, which are bonds, deposits, notes or commercial paper that are
  bought and held for the purpose of selling them in the near term. From a regulatory perspective the latter category principally
  covers trading book positions.
– “Repo and repo-style transactions” consist of reverse repurchase transactions, as well as securities or commodities
  borrowing transactions, only applying collateral received and netting eligible under IFRS.

Although considered in the monitoring of maximum credit exposures, the following are not included in the details of our main
credit exposure: brokerage and securities related receivables, cash and central bank balances, interbank balances (without
central banks), assets held for sale, accrued interest receivables, traditional securitization positions.

Main Credit Exposure Categories by Business Divisions
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                            Loans                          Off-balance sheet     OTC derivatives
                                                                                Designated /                           Revocable and
                                                                trading -       mandatory at                              irrevocable
                                      at amortized          at fair value           fair value         at fair value          lending            Contingent          at fair value
in € m.                                      cost¹         through P&L          through P&L          through OCI²       commitments³               liabilities     through P&L⁴
Corporate Bank                           122,310                   255                   311                4,169            135,944                 55,560                190
Investment Bank                           92,966                 8,590                   702                  202             50,768                  1,764             17,415
Private Bank                             254,439                     0                     7                    0             39,660                  1,883                524
Asset Management                              23                     0                     1                    0                110                      9                  0
Capital Release Unit                       2,222                   344                    15                    0                 41                     31              5,813
Corporate & Other                          4,117                     0                     0                    0                608                    146                203
Total                                    476,077                 9,189                 1,035                4,370            227,132                 59,394             24,146



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
                                                                             Debt Securities                             Repo and repo-style transactions⁷                  Total
                                      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value
in € m.                                      cost⁵         through P&L          through OCI⁶                 cost         through P&L           through OCI
Corporate Bank                                839                   15                    0                   862                   0                     0            320,454
Investment Bank                             3,332               88,692                1,045                 6,692              74,441                     0            346,608
Private Bank                                  525                    1                    2                     0                   0                     0            297,041
Asset Management                                0                3,582                  154                     0                   0                     0              3,879
Capital Release Unit                            0                  625                    0                     0               3,397                     0             12,489
Corporate & Other                          10,154                2,452               22,177                   879                 448                 1,231             42,415
Total                                      14,849               95,367               23,377                 8,433              78,286                 1,231          1,022,886
1
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at amortized cost amounting to € 12.4 billion as of December 31, 2021.
2
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at fair value through OCI amounting to € 28.1 million as of December 31, 2021
3
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI off-balance sheet exposure amounting to € 2.6 billion as of December 31, 2021.
4
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable. Excludes derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
5
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at amortized cost amounting to € 368.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
6
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at fair value through OCI amounting to € 15.8 million as of December 31, 2021.
7
    Before reflection of collateral and limited to securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed.




                                                                                                                                                                             136
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                            Loans                          Off-balance sheet     OTC derivatives
                                                                                Designated /                           Revocable and
                                                                trading -       mandatory at                              irrevocable
                                      at amortized          at fair value           fair value         at fair value          lending            Contingent          at fair value
in € m.                                      cost¹         through P&L          through P&L          through OCI²       commitments³               liabilities     through P&L⁴
Corporate Bank                           114,491                   621                   784                4,393            130,690                 44,293                299
Investment Bank                           69,309                 6,366                 1,618                  220             45,053                  1,889             22,533
Private Bank                             237,194                     0                     7                    0             37,315                  1,625                440
Asset Management                              20                     0                     0                    0                121                      9                  0
Capital Release Unit                       2,807                 1,352                   220                   22              1,592                     38              9,388
Corporate & Other                          7,986                     0                     0                    0              1,106                    123                268
Total                                    431,807                 8,339                 2,629                4,635            215,877                 47,978             32,928



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                                             Debt Securities                              Repo and repo-style transactions⁷                 Total
                                      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value
in € m.                                      cost⁵         through P&L          through OCI⁶                 cost         through P&L           through OCI
Corporate Bank                                733                   68                    0                   345                   0                     0            296,717
Investment Bank                             2,078               86,579                  980                 7,356              59,974                     0            303,956
Private Bank                                  521                    2                    1                    10                   0                     0            277,115
Asset Management                                0                2,850                  198                     0                   0                     0              3,198
Capital Release Unit                            0                1,404                    0                     1               3,091                     0             19,915
Corporate & Other                           9,294                4,443               48,476                   824                   0                 1,543             74,063
Total                                      12,625               95,347               49,656                 8,535              63,066                 1,543            974,964
1
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at amortized cost amounting to € 11.9 billion as of December 31, 2020.
2
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at fair value through OCI amounting to € 90.3 million as of December 31, 2020
3
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI off-balance sheet exposure amounting to € 2.6 billion as of December 31, 2020.
4
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable. Excludes derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
5
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at amortized cost amounting to € 360.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
6
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at fair value through OCI amounting to € 15.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
7
    Before reflection of collateral and limited to securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed.


Our total main credit exposure increased by € 47.9 billion year-on-year.

– In terms of business divisions, total main credit exposure increased by € 42.7 billion in the Investment Bank including a
  large episodic financing in the loan book which is expected to reverse in first quarter 2022, € 23.7 billion in the Corporate
  Bank, € 19.9 billion in the Private Bank and € 0.7 billion in Asset Management, partially offset by decreases in Corporate
  & Other by € 31.6 billion and € 7.4 billion in the Capital Release Unit. The business division Corporate & Other primarily
  contains exposures in Treasury.
– From a product perspective, exposure increases have been observed for loans, off-balance sheet positions and repo and
  repo-style transactions, while decreases were observed in debt securities and OTC derivatives.




                                                                                                                                                                             137
Deutsche Bank                                              Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                         Credit Risk Exposure




Main Credit Exposure Categories by Industry Sectors
The below tables give an overview of our credit exposure by industry based on the NACE code of the counterparty. NACE
(Nomenclature des Activités Économiques dans la Communauté Européenne) is a standard European industry classification
system and does not have to be congruent with an internal risk based view applied elsewhere in this report.

                                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                 Loans                       Off-balance sheet     OTC derivatives
                                                                    Designated /                            Revocable and
                                                     trading -      mandatory at                               irrevocable
                                 at amortized    at fair value          fair value          at fair value          lending         Contingent          at fair value
in € m.                                 cost¹   through P&L         through P&L           through OCI²       commitments³            liabilities     through P&L⁴
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing                                 645                2                   0                     0               593                  36                    3
Mining and quarrying                  2,783              190                   0                    33             5,220               1,893                   32
Manufacturing                        35,404              348                  26                 1,042            51,706              11,612                5,034
Electricity, gas, steam
and air conditioning
supply                                4,548              226                  46                       0           5,068                2,807                  360
Water supply, sewerage,
waste management and
remediation activities                  681                0                    0                     0              484                  175                   67
Construction                          4,374              234                    2                    40            2,939                2,714                  256
Wholesale and retail
trade, repair of motor
vehicles and motorcycles             21,285              196                  34                   930            16,368                7,135                  298
Transport and storage                 5,330              334                  87                   316             5,729                  947                  515
Accommodation and food
service activities                    2,259                 5                   0                      8           1,308                  136                     7
Information and
communication                         6,363              286                  80                   658            13,837                2,896                  924
Financial and insurance
activities                         106,343            3,219                  578                 1,099            65,114              24,361              13,369
Real estate activities              40,629            2,478                   30                    83             6,486                 208                 822
Professional, scientific
and technical activities              6,959               63                    0                      0           5,245                2,147                   85
Administrative and
support service activities            9,759              472                  71                     22            5,114                  816                  496
Public administration and
defense, compulsory
social security                       6,183              757                  12                   124             2,519                  105               1,037
Education                               225                0                   0                     0               132                   56                 255
Human health services
and social work activities            3,869              111                  25                       0           1,646                  141                  157
Arts, entertainment and
recreation                            1,062                6                   0                      0            1,899                   88                   56
Other service activities              4,941              262                  44                     14            4,790                  810                   91
Activities of households
as employers,
undifferentiated goods-
and services-producing
activities of households
for own use                        212,434                  0                   0                      1          30,934                  311                  253
Activities of extraterritorial
organizations and bodies                 1                0                   0                      0                 0                   2                  31
Total                              476,077            9,189               1,035                  4,370           227,132              59,394              24,146




                                                                                                                                                               138
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021
                                                                             Debt Securities                             Repo and repo-style transactions⁷             Total
                                      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value      at amortized          at fair value        at fair value
in € m.                                      cost⁵         through P&L          through OCI⁶                 cost         through P&L          through OCI
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing                                           0                 12                      0                   0                     0                    0         1,291
Mining and quarrying                              4                371                      2                   0                     0                    0        10,529
Manufacturing                                     4              1,746                     37                   0                     0                    0       106,960
Electricity, gas, steam
and air conditioning
supply                                          15                  601                      1                  0                     0                    0        13,669
Water supply, sewerage,
waste management and
remediation activities                           0                   22                     0                   0                     0                    0         1,429
Construction                                    60                  456                    10                   0                     0                    0        11,086
Wholesale and retail
trade, repair of motor
vehicles and motorcycles                         6                  335                      2                  0                     0                    0        46,589
Transport and storage                          306                  888                      1                  0                     0                    0        14,452
Accommodation and food
service activities                                0                  91                      0                  0                     0                    0          3,814
Information and
communication                                   78               1,007                       9                  0                     0                    0        26,137
Financial and insurance
activities                                  3,542               18,588                 4,511               8,428               76,317                1,231         326,701
Real estate activities                        381                2,405                   129                   0                    0                    0          53,650
Professional, scientific
and technical activities                        28                  176                  157                    0                     0                    0        14,860
Administrative and
support service activities                      27                  323                      3                  0                     0                    0        17,103
Public administration and
defense, compulsory
social security                            10,185               63,108               18,216                     0               1,957                      0       104,203
Education                                       0                  275                    0                     0                   0                      0           942
Human health services
and social work activities                        0                 468                      0                  0                     0                    0          6,417
Arts, entertainment and
recreation                                       0                 131                      0                   0                    0                     0         3,241
Other service activities                       174               2,693                     14                   5                   12                     0        13,849
Activities of households
as employers,
undifferentiated goods-
and services-producing
activities of households
for own use                                       0                    0                     0                  0                     0                    0       243,933
Activities of extraterritorial
organizations and bodies                       40                1,671                  287                    0                    0                    0           2,032
Total                                      14,849               95,367               23,377                8,433               78,286                1,231       1,022,886
1
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at amortized cost amounting to € 12.4 billion as of December 31, 2021.
2
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at fair value through OCI amounting to € 28.1 million as of December 31, 2021
3
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI off-balance sheet exposure amounting to € 2.6 billion as of December 31, 2021.
4
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable. Excludes derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
5
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at amortized cost amounting to € 368.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
6
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at fair value through OCI amounting to € 15.8 million as of December 31, 2021.
7
    Before reflection of collateral and limited to securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed.




                                                                                                                                                                        139
Deutsche Bank                                              Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                         Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                 Loans                       Off-balance sheet     OTC derivatives
                                                                    Designated /                            Revocable and
                                                     trading -      mandatory at                               irrevocable
                                 at amortized    at fair value          fair value          at fair value          lending         Contingent          at fair value
in € m.                                 cost¹   through P&L         through P&L           through OCI²       commitments³            liabilities     through P&L⁴
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing                                 637                0                   0                     0               544                  40                    3
Mining and quarrying                  2,871              250                   8                    15             5,148               1,370                   34
Manufacturing                        26,050              525                 354                 1,111            52,722              10,314                4,677
Electricity, gas, steam
and air conditioning
supply                                3,419              295                  51                       0           5,080                1,783                  614
Water supply, sewerage,
waste management and
remediation activities                  681                0                    0                     0              396                  156                   80
Construction                          4,440              243                    2                    22            2,672                2,490                  438
Wholesale and retail
trade, repair of motor
vehicles and motorcycles             20,697              330                  83                   913            15,672                5,025                  614
Transport and storage                 5,575              427                  69                   312             5,235                  978                  715
Accommodation and food
service activities                    2,427               60                    0                    27            1,203                  158                   27
Information and
communication                         5,525              308                    3                  404            14,030                2,072                  887
Financial and insurance
activities                           84,724           2,860               1,823                    813            56,024              19,467              18,042
Real estate activities               36,571             989                  46                    339             5,776                 312               1,401
Professional, scientific
and technical activities              7,707              228                    0                    12            4,919                1,915                  147
Administrative and
support service activities            9,112              333                  66                     56            4,266                  453                  672
Public administration and
defense, compulsory
social security                       6,139              828                  13                   433             2,983                    93              3,094
Education                               205                0                   0                     0               126                    14                459
Human health services
and social work activities            3,436               68                  26                       0           2,373                  127                  484
Arts, entertainment and
recreation                              929               22                   0                     0             1,105                   59                   30
Other service activities              5,353              551                  84                   177             4,305                  877                  131
Activities of households
as employers,
undifferentiated goods-
and services-producing
activities of households
for own use                        205,308                22                    0                      2          31,298                  272                  325
Activities of extraterritorial
organizations and bodies                 1                0                   0                      0                 0                   2                  54
Total                              431,807            8,339               2,629                  4,635           215,877              47,978              32,928




                                                                                                                                                               140
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2020
                                                                             Debt Securities                              Repo and repo-style transactions⁷            Total
                                      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value      at amortized          at fair value        at fair value
in € m.                                      cost⁵         through P&L          through OCI⁶                 cost         through P&L          through OCI
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing                                           0                   6                     0                   0                     0                    0         1,230
Mining and quarrying                              0                 354                     2                   0                     0                    0        10,053
Manufacturing                                     0                 995                    39                   0                     0                    0        96,788
Electricity, gas, steam
and air conditioning
supply                                            0                 437                      1                  0                     0                    0        11,679
Water supply, sewerage,
waste management and
remediation activities                            0                  40                     0                   0                     0                    0         1,354
Construction                                      0                 565                    70                   0                     0                    0        10,944
Wholesale and retail
trade, repair of motor
vehicles and motorcycles                         0                  213                     2                   0                     0                    0        43,548
Transport and storage                          203                  811                    26                   0                     0                    0        14,351
Accommodation and food
service activities                                0                  63                      0                  0                     0                    0          3,964
Information and
communication                                     8                 514                      5                  0                     0                    0        23,756
Financial and insurance
activities                                  3,167               20,866                 8,114               8,428               61,801                1,543         287,672
Real estate activities                        333                3,047                   109                   0                    0                    0          48,924
Professional, scientific
and technical activities                        25                  105                    25                   8                     0                    0        15,091
Administrative and
support service activities                      36                  270                      3                 99                     0                    0        15,367
Public administration and
defense, compulsory
social security                             8,670               61,459               40,574                     0               1,089                      0       125,374
Education                                       0                  120                   21                     0                   0                      0           945
Human health services
and social work activities                        0                 473                      0                  0                     0                    0          6,987
Arts, entertainment and
recreation                                      31                  83                     0                    0                    0                     0         2,258
Other service activities                       110               3,654                   162                    0                  176                     0        15,580
Activities of households
as employers,
undifferentiated goods-
and services-producing
activities of households
for own use                                       0                    0                     0                  0                     0                    0       237,226
Activities of extraterritorial
organizations and bodies                       40                1,272                  503                    0                    0                    0           1,873
Total                                      12,625               95,347               49,656                8,535               63,066                1,543         974,965
1
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at amortized cost amounting to € 11.9 billion as of December 31, 2020.
2
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at fair value through OCI amounting to € 90.3 million as of December 31, 2020
3
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI off-balance sheet exposure amounting to € 2.6 billion as of December 31, 2020.
4
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable. Excludes derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
5
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at amortized cost amounting to € 360.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
6
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at fair value through OCI amounting to € 15.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
7
    Before reflection of collateral and limited to securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed.




                                                                                                                                                                        141
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                               Credit Risk Exposure




The portfolio is subject to the same credit underwriting requirements stipulated in our “Principles for Managing Credit Risk”,
including various controls according to single name, country, industry and product/asset class-specific concentration.

Material transactions, such as loans underwritten with the intention to sell down or distribute part of the risk to third parties,
are subject to review and approval by senior credit risk management professionals and (depending upon size) an underwriting
committee and/or the Management Board. High emphasis is placed on structuring and pricing such transactions so that de-
risking can be achieved in a timely manner and – where DB takes market price risk – to mitigate such market risk.

Our amortized cost loan exposure within above categories is mostly to good quality borrowers. Moreover, with the focus on
the Corporate Bank and Investment Bank, loan exposure is subject to further risk mitigation through our Strategic Corporate
Lending unit (“SCL”).

Our household loan exposure is principally associated with our Private Bank portfolios.

Our amortized cost loan exposure of € 40.6 billion to Real Estate activities above is based on NACE code classification. We
also provide an understanding of our Commercial Real Estate exposures across the Commercial Real Estate Group, APAC
CRE exposures in the Investment Bank and non-recourse CRE business in the Corporate Bank. Please refer to the chapter
“Focus Industries in light of COVID-19 Pandemic” for further information on Commercial Real Estate exposures.

Our commercial real estate loans, primarily originated in the U.S. and Europe, are generally secured by first mortgages on the
underlying real estate property. Deutsche Bank originates fixed and floating rate loans and selectively acquires (generally a t
substantial discount) sub- /non-performing loans sold by financial institutions. The underwriting process is stringent and the
exposure is managed under separate portfolio limits. Credit underwriting policy guidelines provide that LTV ratios of generally
less than 75 % are maintained. Additionally, given the significance of the underlying collateral, independent external appraisals
are commissioned for all secured loans by a valuation team (part of the independent Credit Risk Management function) which
is also responsible for reviewing and challenging the reported real estate values regularly. Deutsche Bank originates loans for
distribution in the banking market or via securitization. In this context Deutsche Bank frequently retains a portion of the
syndicated loans while securitized positions may be entirely sold (except where regulation requires retention of economic risk).
Mezzanine or other junior tranches of debt are retained only in exceptional cases. The bank also participates in conservatively
underwritten unsecured lines of credit to well-capitalized real estate investment trusts and other real estate operating
companies.

Commercial real estate property valuations and rental incomes can be significantly impacted by macro-economic conditions
and idiosyncratic events affecting the underlying properties. Accordingly, the portfolio is categorized as higher risk and hence
subject to the aforementioned tight restrictions on concentration.

Our credit exposure to our ten largest counterparties accounted for 8 % of our aggregated total credit exposure in these
categories as of December 31, 2021 compared with 9 % as of December 31, 2020. Our top ten counterparty exposures were
well-rated counterparties or otherwise related to structured trades which show high levels of risk mitigation.

Overall credit exposure to the industry sector Financial and Insurance Activities was predominantly comprised of investment-
grade exposures. Total loans across all applicable measurement categories amounted to € 111.2 billion, total repo and repo
style transactions across all applicable measurement categories amounted to € 86.0 billion and off-balance sheet activities
amounted to € 89.5 billion as of December 31, 2021, and were principally associated with Investment Bank and Corporate
Bank portfolios, which were majorly held in North America and Europe.




                                                                                                                             142
Deutsche Bank                                        Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                   Credit Risk Exposure




Main credit exposure categories by geographical region
                                                                                                                                               Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                           Loans                       Off-balance sheet     OTC derivatives
                                                              Designated /                               Revocable
                                               trading -      mandatory at                               and irrevo-
                           at amortized    at fair value          fair value          at fair value    cable lending         Contingent          at fair value
in € m.                           cost¹   through P&L         through P&L           through OCI²      commitments³             liabilities     through P&L⁴
Europe                       341,429            3,411                  702                 1,365          129,396               35,814              13,525
  Of which:
  Germany                    235,389              407                   20                   173            73,087              14,388                1,535
  United Kingdom               6,331              529                  243                   297             8,851               2,796                4,480
  France                       3,581               59                    2                    55             6,840               2,179                  925
  Luxembourg                  14,195              517                   82                    53             7,393                 713                  646
  Italy                       24,316              227                    9                     0             3,484               4,510                  398
  Netherlands                  9,383              137                  102                   384             8,391               2,237                1,226
  Spain                       16,283              246                    0                    43             3,215               3,464                  668
  Ireland                      4,652              262                  234                    72             2,687                 210                  549
  Switzerland                 13,083               34                    0                   110             6,156               2,710                  145
  Poland                       2,293                0                    0                    16               401                 116                   14
  Belgium                      1,426                5                    0                    76             1,724                 578                  212
  Russian Federation⁸            806               54                    0                    51               629                 209                   27
  Ukraine⁸                       109              4419                   0                     0                 3                  22                    0
  Other Europe⁸,¹⁰             9,583              492                   10                    37             6,535               1,683                2,700
North America                 87,628            3,904                  132                 2,060            87,172               9,411                7,853
  Of which:
  U.S.                         73,007           3,156                   91                 1,836            82,800               8,685                6,839
  Cayman Islands                5,709             157                    3                     0             1,555                  80                  396
  Canada                          935             291                    0                   200             1,977                 419                  218
  Other North America           7,976             301                   37                    24               839                 227                  401
Asia/Pacific                   40,093             944                  185                   874             9,151              12,786                2,605
  Of which:
  Japan                        1,921               62                 108                     48              608                  519                 656
  Australia                    2,112              264                  25                      0            2,248                  532                 257
  India                        7,948                4                   6                     18              920                3,440                  95
  China                        5,606                9                   0                     42              480                1,913                 554
  Singapore                    5,750              127                  23                    135            1,157                1,566                 157
  Hong Kong                    3,146               89                   0                     51            1,258                  752                 181
  Other Asia/Pacific          13,610              390                  23                    581            2,480                4,064                 706
Other geographical areas       6,926              931                  16                     71            1,414                1,383                 163
Total                        476,077            9,189               1,035                  4,370          227,132               59,394              24,146




                                                                                                                                                         143
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                  Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021
                                                                           Debt Securities                             Repo and repo-style transactions⁷                Total
                                    at amortized          at fair value        at fair value       at amortized         at fair value        at fair value
in € m.                                    cost⁵         through P&L         through OCI⁶                  cost        through P&L          through OCI
Europe                                    3,464               45,063                7,578               2,745               32,525                  484             617,500
  Of which:
  Germany                                   548                7,152                 932                  274                3,301                   32             337,236
  United Kingdom                            951                8,604               1,151                  571                8,824                    0              43,628
  France                                      0                6,482               1,411                    5               12,910                    0              34,448
  Luxembourg                                 57                2,471                 497                    0                  971                    0              27,594
  Italy                                     314                3,655                 315                   85                  729                    0              38,042
  Netherlands                               212                2,157                  51                   29                   38                    0              24,347
  Spain                                      74                7,193                 199                1,126                  500                    0              33,012
  Ireland                                 1,143                1,264                   3                    2                3,158                    0              14,237
  Switzerland                                 3                  583                   4                    0                  140                    0              22,968
  Poland                                      0                   73               1,870                    0                   76                    0               4,859
  Belgium                                    33                1,932                 805                    0                    7                    0               6,798
  Russian Federation⁸                         0                   14                  36                    0                    0                    0               1,826
  Ukraine⁸                                    0                    2                  29                    0                    0                    0                 606
  Other Europe⁸,¹⁰                          130                3,481                 274                  653                1,870                  452              27,900
North America                             8,618               26,899              10,363                2,551               38,688                    0             285,278
  Of which:
  U.S.                                    8,600               25,959              10,059                  517               26,173                    0             247,722
  Cayman Islands                              0                  238                   0                2,034               11,679                    0              21,851
  Canada                                      0                  476                 235                    0                  834                    0               5,586
  Other North America                        18                  225                  69                    0                    3                    0              10,119
Asia/Pacific                              2,718               21,369               5,053                2,868                7,000                  508             106,154
  Of which:
  Japan                                      25                2,951                 556                    0                3,672                    0              11,127
  Australia                               1,597                1,726                 510                    0                  515                    0               9,787
  India                                     617                5,067                 944                    0                  253                  360              19,670
  China                                      16                1,576                 560                    0                  594                    0              11,349
  Singapore                                   9                  860                 246                    0                  107                    0              10,136
  Hong Kong                                 213                  742                 246                    0                  184                    0               6,861
  Other Asia/Pacific                        242                8,447               1,990                2,868                1,675                  147              37,224
Other geographical areas                     49                2,037                 384                  268                   72                  240              13,954
Total                                    14,849               95,367              23,377                8,433               78,286                1,231           1,022,886
1
   Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at amortized cost amounting to € 12.4 billion as of December 31, 2021.
2
   Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at fair value through OCI amounting to € 28.1 million as of December 31, 2021
3
   Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI off-balance sheet exposure amounting to € 2.6 billion as of December 31, 2021.
4
   Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable. Excludes derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
5
   Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at amortized cost amounting to € 368.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
6
   Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at fair value through OCI amounting to € 15.8 million as of December 31, 2021.
7
   Before reflection of collateral and limited to securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed.
8
   Thematic addition on back of the ongoing border conflict between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
9
   Ukraine trading loan exposure driven by financing, materially guaranteed by supranational development bank. Net exposure considering broader risk mitigation structure is
   demonyms.
10
   Other Europe includes Belarus with a total exposure of less than € 2 million.




                                                                                                                                                                          144
Deutsche Bank                                        Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                   Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                               Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                           Loans                       Off-balance sheet     OTC derivatives
                                                              Designated /                               Revocable
                                               trading -      mandatory at                               and irrevo-
                           at amortized    at fair value          fair value          at fair value    cable lending         Contingent          at fair value
in € m.                           cost¹   through P&L         through P&L           through OCI²      commitments³             liabilities     through P&L⁴
Europe                       317,584            3,092               1,519                  1,615          128,440               29,529              20,283
  Of which:
  Germany                    224,577              340                   57                   347            75,531              12,195                1,715
  United Kingdom               5,796              160                  341                    64             9,820               2,327                7,102
  France                       3,460               65                   33                   187             6,103               1,383                1,331
  Luxembourg                  10,097              546                  252                     0             4,839               1,251                  701
  Italy                       23,442              340                   66                     0             3,600               3,888                1,854
  Netherlands                  9,679               79                  222                   554             9,890               1,727                1,942
  Spain                       17,134              304                    0                    28             3,755               2,763                1,094
  Ireland                      4,173              190                  200                   127             2,023                 200                  465
  Switzerland                  6,817               39                   19                   150             4,518               1,762                  268
  Poland                       2,421                0                    1                     0               374                 128                   17
  Belgium                      1,133                4                    0                    53             1,566                 679                  295
  Russian Federation⁸            665               74                    0                    57               382                 239                   17
  Ukraine⁸                       280              425                    0                     0                17                  11                    0
  Other Europe⁸                7,910              527                  327                    46             6,021                 976                3,480
North America                 73,742            3,266                  841                 1,896            78,079               7,430                9,420
  Of which:
  U.S.                         61,137           2,926                  784                 1,792            73,215                7,033               8,496
  Cayman Islands                3,790             113                    3                     0             2,131                   25                 246
  Canada                          887              37                    0                    91             1,790                   47                 303
  Other North America           7,928             191                   54                    13               943                  326                 374
Asia/Pacific                   34,194           1,248                  237                   992             7,813                9,960               2,766
  Of which:
  Japan                        1,385               17                   0                     89              415                  483                 312
  Australia                    1,525              258                  36                     35            1,785                  367                 542
  India                        6,355               54                  21                     32            1,110                2,253                 149
  China                        4,764                6                 149                     46              684                1,780                 658
  Singapore                    5,309              210                  30                     28              918                  685                 248
  Hong Kong                    2,872              109                   0                     61              986                  671                 186
  Other Asia/Pacific          11,984              593                   0                    702            1,914                3,721                 670
Other geographical areas       6,286              734                  31                    133            1,545                1,059                 460
Total                        431,807            8,339               2,629                  4,635          215,877               47,978              32,928




                                                                                                                                                         145
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2020
                                                                             Debt Securities                             Repo and repo-style transactions⁷             Total
                                      at amortized          at fair value         at fair value      at amortized          at fair value        at fair value
in € m.                                      cost⁵         through P&L          through OCI⁶                 cost         through P&L          through OCI
Europe                                      2,468               46,446               31,902                2,180               21,696                  498         607,251
  Of which:
  Germany                                     544                8,252               10,467                  263                1,078                   10         335,377
  United Kingdom                              890                7,980                2,776                    0               11,352                    0          48,607
  France                                        2                8,136                5,216                    0                5,981                    0          31,898
  Luxembourg                                   41                2,509                1,412                    0                  819                    0          22,466
  Italy                                       117                5,908                1,496                  108                  478                    0          41,297
  Netherlands                                 112                3,486                  118                    0                   33                    0          27,843
  Spain                                         0                3,053                3,088                1,077                  500                    0          32,796
  Ireland                                     680                1,415                  136                    0                  396                    0          10,004
  Switzerland                                   4                  637                    4                    0                   79                    0          14,299
  Poland                                        0                  112                1,993                    0                    0                    0           5,047
  Belgium                                      40                1,575                1,616                    0                    5                    0           6,966
  Russian Federation⁸                           0                   42                   34                    0                    0                    0           1,510
  Ukraine⁸                                      0                    8                   17                    0                    0                    0             758
  Other Europe⁸                                38                3,334                3,529                  731                  975                  488          28,381
North America                               7,727               27,547               11,798                2,780               31,907                    0         256,433
  Of which:
  U.S.                                      7,351               26,408               11,197                1,814               29,370                    0         231,523
  Cayman Islands                              359                  567                    0                  885                2,086                    0          10,206
  Canada                                        0                  417                  543                    0                  451                    0           4,567
  Other North America                          16                  155                   58                   81                    0                    0          10,137
Asia/Pacific                                2,431               19,246                5,740                3,353                9,426                  646          98,052
  Of which:
  Japan                                        64                2,807                   25                    0                6,283                    0          11,881
  Australia                                 1,545                2,535                  860                    0                  659                    0          10,149
  India                                       349                3,284                2,047                    0                  128                  396          16,177
  China                                         0                3,012                  309                    0                  421                    0          11,830
  Singapore                                    78                2,067                  472                    0                  105                    0          10,152
  Hong Kong                                   207                  725                  286                   60                   12                    0           6,175
  Other Asia/Pacific                          188                4,816                1,740                3,293                1,817                  250          31,689
Other geographical areas                        0                2,107                  216                  223                   37                  399          13,229
Total                                      12,625               95,347               49,656                8,535               63,066                1,543         974,965
1
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at amortized cost amounting to € 11.9 billion as of December 31, 2020.
2
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI loans at fair value through OCI amounting to € 90.3 million as of December 31, 2020
3
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI off-balance sheet exposure amounting to € 2.6 billion as of December 31, 2020.
4
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable. Excludes derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
5
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at amortized cost amounting to € 360.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
6
    Includes stage 3 and stage 3 POCI debt securities at fair value through OCI amounting to € 15.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
7
    Before reflection of collateral and limited to securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed.
8
    Thematic addition on back of the ongoing border conflict between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.


The tables above give an overview of our credit exposure by geographical region, allocated based on the co unterparty’s
country of domicile. Aforementioned domicile view does not have to be congruent with an internal risk based view applied
elsewhere in this report

Our largest concentration of credit risk within loans from a regional perspective is in our home market Germany, with a
significant share in households, which includes the majority of our mortgage lending and home loan business.

Within OTC derivatives, tradable assets as well as repo and repo-style transactions, our largest concentrations from a regional
perspective were in Europe and North America.


Credit Exposure Classification
We also classify our credit exposure along our business divisions, which is in line with the divisionally aligned chief risk officer
mandates. In the section below, we show the credit exposure of the Corporate Bank and the Investment Bank together. In the
subsequent section, we provide the credit exposure for the Private Bank.




                                                                                                                                                                        146
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposure
The tables below show our main Corporate Bank and Investment Bank Credit Exposure by product types and internal rating
bands. Please refer to section "Measuring Credit Risk" for more details about our internal ratings.

Main Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposure categories according to our internal creditworthiness categories of our
counterparties – gross
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
in € m.                                                                                                                                                                     OTC
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                        Loans                       Off-balance sheet        derivatives
                                                                                      Designated /                            Revocable
                                                                      trading -       mandatory at                            and irrevo-
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value           fair value        at fair value   cable lending          Contingent        at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %1             cost       through P&L          through P&L          through OCI      commitments              liabilities   through P&L2
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04             23,066                 130                      13               159          26,153                 3,545              4,008
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11             41,041                 138                     202             1,151          53,557                27,267              4,502
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5            61,562                 789                     192             1,967          54,600                14,362              2,710
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27            51,617               4,058                     296               857          26,794                 6,799              5,923
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22            29,606               2,333                     111               207          22,360                 3,479                373
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100              8,385               1,397                     198                29           3,247                 1,872                 90
Total                                            215,276               8,845                   1,013             4,370         186,711                57,324             17,606



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                           Debt Securities                         Repo and repo-style transactions
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value        at fair value                         at fair value         at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %1             cost       through P&L          through OCI      at amortized cost    through P&L           through OCI               Total
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04               1,253             49,214                       0               473           35,615                       −        143,629
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11               1,433             11,698                     108             1,127           17,831                       −        160,055
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5                439             11,786                      90             2,035            9,144                       −        159,678
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27                265             13,621                     225             1,844           11,363                       −        123,659
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22                357              1,745                     590             1,475              361                       −         62,995
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100                 423                643                      32               600              128                       −         17,045
Total                                               4,171             88,707                   1,045             7,554           74,441                       −        667,062
1
    Reflects the probability of default for a one year time horizon.
2
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable.


Main Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposure categories according to our internal creditworthiness categories of our
counterparties – net
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021¹
in € m.                                                                                                                                                                     OTC
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                        Loans                       Off-balance sheet        derivatives
                                                                                      Designated /                            Revocable
                                                                      trading -       mandatory at                            and irrevo-
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value           fair value        at fair value   cable lending          Contingent        at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %2             cost       through P&L          through P&L          through OCI      commitments              liabilities    through P&L
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04             16,959                 130                     13                 45          24,962                 2,664              2,518
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11             31,570                  53                    202                998          51,421                24,751              3,087
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5            32,646                 633                     89              1,752          51,426                12,207              2,287
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27            26,315               2,451                    208                435          24,316                 5,343              5,843
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22            10,221               1,551                     45                167          21,138                 2,236                370
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100              4,336                 961                     67                 29           3,079                 1,095                 90
Total                                            122,047               5,779                    624              3,427         176,342                48,295             14,195



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021¹
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                           Debt Securities                         Repo and repo-style transactions
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value        at fair value                         at fair value         at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %2             cost       through P&L          through OCI      at amortized cost    through P&L           through OCI               Total
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04               1,253             49,214                       0                 16                0                      −         97,775
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11               1,433             11,698                     108                  0               22                      −        125,344
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5                439             11,773                      90                 67               22                      −        113,430
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27                260             13,583                     225                 14              259                      −         79,252
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22                334              1,745                     590                  0                0                      −         38,397
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100                 361                621                      32                  0                0                      −         10,672
Total                                               4,080             88,635                   1,045                 97              304                      −        464,869
1
    Net of eligible collateral, guarantees and hedges based on IFRS requirements.
2
    Reflects the probability of default for a one year time horizon.




                                                                                                                                                                             147
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Credit Risk Exposure




The tables below show our main Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposure for 2020 by product types and internal
rating bands.

Main Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposure categories according to our internal creditworthiness categories of our
counterparties – gross
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
in € m.                                                                                                                                                                     OTC
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                        Loans                       Off-balance sheet        derivatives
                                                                                      Designated /                            Revocable
                                                                      trading -       mandatory at                            and irrevo-
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value           fair value        at fair value   cable lending          Contingent        at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %1             cost       through P&L          through P&L          through OCI      commitments              liabilities   through P&L2
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04             13,679                  44                     446               114          20,168                 1,911              4,230
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11             29,365                 436                     347               641          47,835                11,794              6,414
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5            55,845               1,047                     672             2,149          57,941                22,069              4,395
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27            48,063               2,470                     500             1,458          26,476                 5,566              3,202
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22            26,885               1,813                      76               160          18,789                 2,864              4,477
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100              9,962               1,177                     361                92           4,535                 1,978                113
Total                                            183,800               6,987                   2,401             4,614         175,743                46,182             22,831



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                           Debt Securities                         Repo and repo-style transactions
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value        at fair value                         at fair value         at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %1             cost       through P&L          through OCI      at amortized cost    through P&L           through OCI               Total
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04               1,183             50,886                    103                298           27,745                       −        120,806
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11                 527              7,762                     82                827            8,504                       −        114,533
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5                307             12,569                     87              1,425            8,346                       −        166,851
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27                174             13,062                    400              2,239           15,004                       −        118,616
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22                239              1,607                    293              2,311              375                       −         59,889
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100                 382                762                     15                600                0                       −         19,978
Total                                               2,811             86,647                    980              7,700           59,974                       −        600,672
1
    Reflects the probability of default for a one year time horizon.
2
    Includes the effect of netting agreements and cash collateral received where applicable.


Main Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposure categories according to our internal creditworthiness categories of our
counterparties – net
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020¹
in € m.                                                                                                                                                                     OTC
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                        Loans                       Off-balance sheet        derivatives
                                                                                      Designated /                            Revocable
                                                                      trading -       mandatory at                            and irrevo-
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value           fair value        at fair value   cable lending          Contingent        at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %2             cost       through P&L          through P&L          through OCI      commitments              liabilities    through P&L
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04              8,684                  44                     446                 0          19,088                 1,618              3,381
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11             22,618                 131                     347               621          46,384                 9,837              4,957
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5            31,266                 889                     625             1,602          54,626                19,365              4,190
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27            22,984               1,887                     407               955          23,947                 3,995              3,100
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22             8,853                 824                       6               140          17,614                 2,244              4,432
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100              4,823                 759                     207                92           4,263                 1,269                113
Total                                             99,228               4,534                   2,038             3,410         165,922                38,330             20,174



                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020¹
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                           Debt Securities                         Repo and repo-style transactions
                              Probability     at amortized        at fair value        at fair value                         at fair value         at fair value
Ratingband               of default in %2             cost       through P&L          through OCI      at amortized cost    through P&L           through OCI               Total
iAAA–iAA                > 0.00 ≤ 0.04               1,183             50,886                    103                   0               27                      −         85,460
iA                      > 0.04 ≤ 0.11                 527              7,762                     82                   0                1                      −         93,268
iBBB                      > 0.11 ≤ 0.5                307             12,569                     87                  23                3                      −        125,551
iBB                       > 0.5 ≤ 2.27                171             13,017                    400                  71                3                      −         70,939
iB                      > 2.27 ≤ 10.22                239              1,607                    293                   0                0                      −         36,253
iCCC and below          > 10.22 ≤ 100                 311                727                     15                   0                0                      −         12,579
Total                                               2,737             86,567                    980                  95               34                      −        424,049
1
    Net of eligible collateral, guarantees and hedges based on IFRS requirements.
2
    Reflects the probability of default for a one year time horizon.




                                                                                                                                                                             148
Deutsche Bank                                                        Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                   Credit Risk Exposure




The above tables show an overall increase in our Corporate Bank and Investment Bank gross exposure in 2021 of € 66.4 billion
or 11 %. Loans at amortized cost increased by € 31.5 billion mainly driven by growth across businesses as well as a large
episodic financing that is expected to reverse in Q1’22. Off-balance sheet positions increased by € 22.1 billion mainly driven
by new commitments and guarantees issued during the period. Repo and repo-style transactions increased by € 14.3 billion
in the Investment Bank mainly driven by higher client activity, debt securities increased by € 3.5 billion. From a regional
perspective, the increase was primarily attributable to counterparties domiciled in the United States, Germany, Switzerland,
Cayman Islands and France. These increases were partly offset by a decrease in OTC derivatives of € 5.2 billion, mainly
driven by interest rate products.

We use risk mitigation techniques as described above to optimize our Corporate Bank and Investment Bank credit exposures
and reduce potential credit losses. The tables for “net” exposure disclose the development of our Corporate Bank and
Investment Bank credit exposures net of collateral, guarantees and hedges.


SCL Risk Mitigation for Credit Exposure

Our Strategic Corporate Lending (“SCL”) unit helps mitigate the risk of our corporate credit exposures. The notional amount
of SCL’s risk reduction activities decreased from € 34.0 billion as of December 31, 2020, to € 31.7 billion as of
December 31, 2021.

As of year-end 2021, SCL mitigated the credit risk of € 27.0 billion of loans and lending-related commitments, through synthetic
collateralized loan obligations supported predominantly by financial guarantees. This position totaled € 30.9 billion as of
December 31, 2020.

SCL also held credit derivatives with an underlying notional amount of € 4.7 billion as of December 31, 2021. The position
totaled € 3.1 billion as of December 31, 2020. The credit derivatives used for our portfolio management activities are accounted
for at fair value.


Private Bank credit exposure
Private Bank credit exposure, credit exposure in stage 3 and net credit costs
                                                Total exposure                      of which loan book             Credit exposure stage 3                         Net credit costs
                                                        in € m.                                 in € m.                             in € m.               as a % of total exposure¹
                               Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020       Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020      Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020       Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
PB Germany                        194,486            185,959            169,639             160,683             2,668              2,798                 0.12 %           0.17 %
   Consumer Finance                29,638             29,352             15,360              15,240             1,446              1,277                 0.77 %           0.77 %
   Mortgage                       159,825            153,165            150,082             143,368             1,187              1,481                 0.00 %           0.06 %
   Business Finance                 1,310              1,246                905                 870                 7                  6                 0.07 %           0.15 %
   Other                            3,713              2,196              3,291               1,206                27                 35                 0.01 %           0.05 %
International Private
Bank                              102,556             91,156             84,800              76,511             4,037              3,484                 0.21 %           0.43 %
   Consumer Finance                11,007             11,162              8,940               8,937               435                350                 0.71 %           1.50 %
   Mortgage                        12,950             13,611             12,889              13,520               701                668                 0.21 %         (0.08 %)
   Business Finance                13,226             12,151             11,320               9,914               968                728                 0.83 %           1.16 %
   Wealth
   Management                      64,553             53,928             51,570              44,072             1,933              1,739              0.00 %              0.17 %
   Other                              819                303                 81                  68                 0                  0            (0.01 %)              1.41 %
Total                             297,041            277,115            254,439             237,194             6,705              6,282              0.15 %              0.26 %
1
    Net credit costs for the twelve months period ended at the respective balance sheet date divided by the total exposure at that balance sheet date.
2
    Net credit costs as a % of total exposures in line Other for International Private Bank for 2020 have been updated.


Consumer Finance is divided into personal instalment loans, credit lines and credit cards. Consumer Finance business is
uncollateralized, loan risk depends on client quality. Various lending requirements are stipulated, including (but not limited to)
client rating, maximum loan amounts and maximum tenors, and are adapted to regional conditions and/or circumstances of
the borrower (i.e., for consumer loans a maximum loan amount taking into account customer net income). Given the largely
homogeneous nature of this portfolio, counterparty credit-worthiness and ratings are predominately derived by utilizing an
automated decision engine.




                                                                                                                                                                               149
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                  Credit Risk Exposure




Mortgage business is the financing of residential properties (primarily owner-occupied) sold by various business channels in
Europe, primarily in Germany but also in Spain and Italy. The level of credit risk of the mortgage loan portfolio is determin ed
by assessing the quality of the client and the underlying collateral. The loan amounts are generally larger than Consumer
Finance loans and they are extended for longer time horizons. Based on our underwriting criteria and processes and the
diversified portfolio (customers/properties) with respective collateralization, the mortgage portfolio is categorized as lower risk,
while consumer finance is categorized as high risk.

Business Finance represents credit products for small businesses, SME up to large corporates. Products range from current
accounts and credit lines to investment loans or revolving facilities, factoring, leasing and derivatives. Smaller clients below a
turnover of € 2.5 million are limited to current accounts and loans. Clients are located primarily in Italy and Spain, but credit
can also be extended to subsidiaries abroad, mostly in Europe.

Wealth Management offers customized wealth management solutions and private banking services including discretionary
portfolio management and traditional and alternative investment solutions, complemented by structured risk management,
wealth planning, lending and family office services for wealth, high-net-worth (HNW) and ultra-high-net-worth (UHNW)
individuals and family offices. Wealth Management’s total exposure is divided into Lombard Lending (against readily
marketable liquid collateral / securities) and Structured Lending (against less liquid collateral). While the level of credit risk for
the Lombard portfolio is determined by assessing the quality of the underlying collateral, the level of credit risk for the structured
portfolio is determined by assessing both the quality of the client and the collateral. Products range from secured Lombard
and mortgage loans to current accounts (Europe only), credit lines and other loans; to a lesser extent derivatives and
contingencies. Clients are located globally.

PB mortgage loan-to-value1
                                                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
≤ 50 %                                                                                                                                             64 %                65 %
> 50 ≤ 70 %                                                                                                                                        17 %                16 %
> 70 ≤ 90 %                                                                                                                                        10 %                10 %
> 90 ≤ 100 %                                                                                                                                        3%                  3%
> 100 ≤ 110 %                                                                                                                                       2%                  2%
> 110 ≤ 130 %                                                                                                                                       2%                  2%
> 130 %                                                                                                                                             2%                  1%
1
    When assigning the exposure to the corresponding LTV buckets, the exposure amounts are distributed according to their relative share of the underlying assessed real estate
    value.


The LTV expresses the amount of exposure as a percentage of the underlying real estate value.

Our LTV ratios are calculated using the total exposure divided by the current determined value of the respective properties.
These values are monitored and updated if necessary on a regular basis. The exposure of transactions that are additionally
backed by liquid collateral is reduced by the respective collateral values, whereas any prior charges increase the
corresponding total exposure. The LTV calculation includes exposure which is secured by real estate collateral. Any mortgage
lending exposure that is collateralized exclusively by any other type of collateral is not included in the LTV calculation.

The creditor’s creditworthiness, the LTV and the quality of collateral is an integral part of our risk management when originating
loans and when monitoring and steering our credit risks. In general, we are willing to accept higher LTV’s, the better the
creditor’s creditworthiness is. Nevertheless, restrictions of LTV apply e.g. for countries with negative economic outlook or
expected declines of real estate values.

As of December 31, 2021, 64 % of our exposure related to the mortgage lending portfolio had a LTV ratio below or equal to
50 %, slightly lower compared to the prior year.




                                                                                                                                                                         150
Deutsche Bank                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                               Credit Risk Exposure




Credit Exposure from Derivatives
All exchange traded derivatives are cleared through central counterparties (“CCPs”), the rules and regulations of which provide
for daily margining of all current and future credit risk positions emerging out of such transactions. To the extent possible, we
also use CCP services for OTC derivative transactions (“OTC clearing”); we thereby benefit from the credit risk mitigation
achieved through the CCP’s settlement system.

The Dodd-Frank Act provides for an extensive framework for the regulation of OTC derivatives, including mandatory clearing,
platform trading and transaction reporting of certain OTC derivatives, as well as rules regarding registration , capital, margin,
business conduct standards, recordkeeping and other requirements for swap dealers, security-based swap dealers, major
swap participants and major security-based swap participants. The Dodd-Frank Act and related CFTC rules require OTC
clearing in the United States for certain standardized OTC derivative transactions, including certain interest rate swaps and
index credit default swaps. Margin requirements for non-cleared derivative transactions in the US started in September 2016.
The European Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 on OTC Derivatives, Central Counterparties and Trade Repositories (“EMIR”)
introduced a number of risk mitigation techniques for non-centrally cleared OTC derivatives in 2013 and the reporting of OTC
and exchange traded derivatives in 2014. Mandatory clearing of certain standardized OTC derivatives transactions in the EU
began in June 2016, and margin requirements for un-cleared OTC derivative transactions in the EU started in February 2017.
Deutsche Bank implemented the exchange of both initial and variation margin in the EU from February 2017 for the first
category of counterparties subject to the EMIR margin for un-cleared derivatives requirements.

The CFTC has adopted rules implementing the most significant provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. More recently, in September
2020, the CFTC issued a final rule on the cross-border application of U.S. swap rules, which builds on, and in some cases
supersedes the CFTC’s cross-border guidance from 2013 and related no-action relief letters. In October 2020, also pursuant
to the Dodd-Frank Act, the CFTC finalized regulations to impose position limits on certain commodities and economically
equivalent swaps, futures and options.

The SEC has also finalized rules regarding registration, trade reporting, capital, margin, risk mitigation techniques, business
conduct standards, trade acknowledgement and verification, recordkeeping and financial reporting, and cross-border
requirements for security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. Compliance with these
requirements was generally required as of November 2021.

Finally, U.S. prudential regulators (the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Farm
Credit Administration and the Federal Housing Finance Agency) have adopted final rules establishing margin requirements
for non-cleared swaps and security-based swaps that are applicable to swap dealers and security-based swap dealers that
are subject to U.S. prudential regulations (such as Deutsche Bank) in lieu of the CFTC’s and the SEC’s margin rules. Deutsche
Bank implemented the exchange of both initial and variation margin for uncleared derivatives in the U.S. from September
2016, for the first category of counterparties subject to the U.S. prudential regulators’ margin requirements. Additional initial
margin requirements for smaller counterparties are in the process of being phased in from September 2017 through September
2022, with the relevant compliance dates depending in each case on the transactional volume of the parties and their affiliates.
The U.S. prudential regulators delayed the initial margin compliance date from September 2020 until September 2021 or
September 2022 for swaps with certain counterparties with lower levels of transactional volume as a result of the impact of
COVID-19.




                                                                                                                            151
Deutsche Bank                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                  Credit Risk Exposure




The following table shows a breakdown of notional amounts and gross market values for assets and liabilities of exchange
traded and OTC derivative transactions on the basis of clearing channel.

Notional amounts of derivatives on basis of clearing channel and type of derivative
                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021
                                                                   Notional amount maturity distribution
                                                                                                            Positive   Negative           Net
                                                              > 1 and                                        market     market         market
in € m.                                  Within 1 year      ≤ 5 years    After 5 years            Total       value      value          value
Interest rate related:
   OTC                                   13,625,153      10,672,998       6,717,198       31,015,349       167,037     154,392        12,645
     Bilateral (Amt)                      1,541,797       1,976,392       1,542,479        5,060,668       156,247     143,526        12,721
     CCP (Amt)                           12,083,356       8,696,606       5,174,718       25,954,681        10,790      10,865           (76)
   Exchange-traded                          730,798         286,032             514        1,017,344           174         131            43
Total Interest rate related              14,355,951      10,959,030       6,717,712       32,032,693       167,211     154,523        12,688
Currency related:
   OTC                                    5,323,845         847,188         420,701         6,591,734      108,030     108,282           (252)
     Bilateral (Amt)                      5,220,578         843,099         420,511         6,484,189      107,244     107,347           (103)
     CCP (Amt)                              103,267           4,088             190           107,545          786         934           (148)
   Exchange-traded                           20,765               0               0            20,765            2           8             (6)
Total Currency related                    5,344,610         847,188         420,701         6,612,499      108,032     108,289           (258)
Equity/index related:
   OTC                                       25,341           9,272            2,881           37,493        5,595       3,666          1,929
     Bilateral (Amt)                         25,341           9,272            2,881           37,493        5,595       3,666          1,929
     CCP (Amt)                                    0               0                0                0            0           0              0
   Exchange-traded                          184,194          44,141            2,286          230,621        3,455       4,723         (1,267)
Total Equity/index related                  209,535          53,413            5,167          268,115        9,050       8,388            661
Credit derivatives related
   OTC                                      129,185         823,005           85,102        1,037,292       15,611      16,359           (748)
     Bilateral (Amt)                         78,553          71,414           34,561          184,529        2,102       2,466           (364)
     CCP (Amt)                               50,632         751,591           50,540          852,763       13,509      13,892           (384)
   Exchange-traded                                0               0                0                0            0           0              0
Total Credit derivatives related            129,185         823,005           85,102        1,037,292       15,611      16,359           (748)
Commodity related:
   OTC                                         2,764           3,419           1,421            7,605          105         107             (2)
     Bilateral (Amt)                           2,764           3,419           1,421            7,605          105         107             (2)
     CCP (Amt)                                     0               0               0                0            0           0              0
   Exchange-traded                            27,241           1,356               0           28,598          218         225             (6)
Total Commodity related                       30,006           4,776           1,421           36,203          323         332             (8)
Other:
   OTC                                       40,047           3,565             157           43,769           606         675           (69)
     Bilateral (Amt)                         40,047           3,565             157           43,769           606         675           (69)
     CCP (Amt)                                    0               0               0                0             0           0             0
   Exchange-traded                            8,786             186               0            8,971             5           9            (5)
Total Other                                  48,832           3,751             157           52,741           610         684           (74)
Total OTC business                       19,146,335      12,359,447       7,227,460       38,733,243       296,983     283,480        13,503
   Total bilateral business               6,909,080       2,907,161       2,002,011       11,818,253       271,899     257,787        14,111
   Total CCP business                    12,237,255       9,452,286       5,225,448       26,914,990        25,084      25,692          (608)
Total exchange-traded business              971,784         331,716           2,800        1,306,300         3,854       5,095        (1,241)
Total                                    20,118,119      12,691,163       7,230,260       40,039,542       300,837     288,575        12,262
Positive market values after netting
and cash collateral received                        −              −                −                 −     25,518           −              −




                                                                                                                                          152
Deutsche Bank                                                      Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                 Credit Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                    Notional amount maturity distribution
                                                                                                                                    Positive         Negative             Net
                                                                              > 1 and                                                market           market           market
in € m.                                                Within 1 year        ≤ 5 years     After 5 years            Total              value            value            value
Interest rate related:
   OTC                                                 11,299,988         8,076,426        5,241,008       24,617,422          230,512               215,795          14,717
     Bilateral (Amt)                                    1,476,276         1,977,542        1,598,819        5,052,637          220,704               206,192          14,512
     CCP (Amt)                                          9,823,712         6,098,884        3,642,189       19,564,785            9,808                 9,602             206
   Exchange-traded                                        605,924           215,611               66          821,601              347                   154             193
Total Interest rate related                            11,905,912         8,292,037        5,241,074       25,439,023          230,859               215,948          14,911
Currency related:
   OTC                                                   4,351,809          791,671          401,111         5,544,590          91,241                87,177            4,063
     Bilateral (Amt)                                     4,255,560          788,132          401,012         5,444,704          90,297                85,830            4,466
     CCP (Amt)                                              96,249            3,539               98            99,886             944                 1,347             (403)
   Exchange-traded                                          43,601                8                0            43,608               5                    24              (19)
Total Currency related                                   4,395,409          791,679          401,111         5,588,199          91,246                87,202            4,044
Equity/index related:
   OTC                                                      28,938           32,164             7,186           68,288               5,700             5,692                8
     Bilateral (Amt)                                        28,938           32,164             7,186           68,288               5,700             5,692                8
     CCP (Amt)                                                   0                0                 0                0                   0                 0                0
   Exchange-traded                                         126,825           36,818             1,634          165,277               3,772             4,902           (1,130)
Total Equity/index related                                 155,763           68,982             8,821          233,565               9,473            10,594           (1,122)
Credit derivatives related
   OTC                                                      61,552          689,031            86,593          837,176          13,557                13,272              285
     Bilateral (Amt)                                        23,672          124,373            32,647          180,692           3,043                 2,628              415
     CCP (Amt)                                              37,880          564,658            53,947          656,484          10,515                10,645             (130)
   Exchange-traded                                               0                0                 0                0               0                     0                0
Total Credit derivatives related                            61,552          689,031            86,593          837,176          13,557                13,272              285
Commodity related:
   OTC                                                       3,716             2,857            1,341            7,913                 142               993             (851)
     Bilateral (Amt)                                         3,716             2,857            1,341            7,913                 138               661             (522)
     CCP (Amt)                                                   0                 0                0                0                   4               332             (328)
   Exchange-traded                                          15,446               744                0           16,190                 409                55              353
Total Commodity related                                     19,162             3,600            1,341           24,103                 551             1,048             (497)
Other:
   OTC                                                    119,254             3,438              154          122,846            1,043                   936             108
     Bilateral (Amt)                                      119,254             3,438              154          122,846            1,043                   936             108
     CCP (Amt)                                                  0                 0                0                0                0                     0               0
   Exchange-traded                                          9,411                 0                0            9,411               29                    53             (24)
Total Other                                               128,665             3,438              154          132,258            1,072                   989              84
Total OTC business                                     15,865,257         9,595,586        5,737,393       31,198,236          342,196               323,866          18,331
   Total bilateral business                             5,907,416         2,928,505        2,041,159       10,877,080          320,925               301,939          18,986
   Total CCP business                                   9,957,840         6,667,081        3,696,234       20,321,155           21,271                21,926            (656)
Total exchange-traded business                            801,207           253,181            1,701        1,056,088            4,562                 5,188            (626)
Total                                                  16,666,463         9,848,767        5,739,094       32,254,324          346,758               329,054          17,704
Positive market values after netting
and cash collateral received                                       −                −                −                 −        35,161                        −             −



Equity Exposure
The table below presents the carrying values of our equity investments according to IFRS definition split by trading and
nontrading for the respective reporting dates. We manage our respective positions within our market risk and other appropriate
risk frameworks.

Composition of our Equity Exposure
in € m.                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020
Trading Equities                                                                                                                                     5,094            11,769
Nontrading Equities¹                                                                                                                                 2,644             2,375
Total Equity Exposure                                                                                                                                7,739            14,145
1
    Includes equity investment funds amounting to € 87 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 291 million as of December 31, 2020.


As of December 31, 2021, our trading equities exposure was mainly composed of € 4.3 billion from Investment Bank and
€ 0.5 billion from Capital Release Unit activities. Overall trading equities decreased by € 6.7 billion year on year driven mainly
by unwinding of trades in the Equities business.




                                                                                                                                                                          153
Deutsche Bank                                                     Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                Trading Market Risk Exposures




Trading Market Risk Exposures
Value-at-Risk Metrics of Trading Units of Deutsche Bank Group
The tables and graph below present the Historic Simulation value-at-risk metrics calculated with a 99 % confidence level and
a one-day holding period for our trading units.

Value-at-Risk of our Trading Units by Risk Type¹
                                                    Diversification       Interest rate       Credit spread       Equity price    Foreign exchange     Commodity price
                                        Total                effect                risk                 risk              risk                 risk²              risk
in € m.                        2021     2020       2021      2020      2021      2020       2021      2020     2021      2020       2021      2020      2021      2020
Average                        37.5     58.9      (37.2)    (44.0)     23.1      17.9       27.9      53.6     13.0      15.5        9.5      13.3       1.1       2.7
Maximum                        69.0    133.3      (21.0)    (10.2)     38.5      36.3       60.3     117.1     20.1      30.8       25.2      32.3       7.9       8.8
Minimum                        27.7     25.6      (76.9)    (84.4)     11.3       8.1       17.5      17.9      6.8       5.3        4.4       4.5       0.3       0.4
Period-end                     31.1     48.1      (27.0)    (72.2)     16.6      27.1       24.1      55.4      8.3      13.5        8.1      22.5       1.0       1.8
1
    Figures for 2021 as of December 31, 2021. Figures for 2020 as of December 31, 2020.
2
    Includes value-at-risk from gold and other precious metal positions.



Development of historic simulation value-at-risk by risk types in 2021
          01/21        02/21       03/21        04/21         05/21        06/21          07/21       08/21      09/21           10/21        11/21       12/21
    90

    80

    70

    60

    50

    40

    30

    20

    10

     0
    in € m.

         VaR Interest rate risk
         VaR Credit spread risk
         VaR Equity risk
         VaR Foreign exchange including precious metals
         VaR Commodity risk
         VaR Total


The average value-at-risk over 2021 was € 37.5 million, which decreased € 21 million (-36 %) compared to the average for
2020, driven by decreases across risk classes from COVID-19 related market volatility impacts rolling out of the value-at-risk
window.

For regulatory reporting purposes, the incremental risk charge for the respective reporting dates represents the higher of the
spot value at the reporting dates, and their preceding 12-week average calculation.




                                                                                                                                                                   154
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Trading Market Risk Exposures




Average, Maximum and Minimum Incremental Risk Charge of Trading Units (with a 99.9 % confidence level and one-year capital
horizon)1,2,3,
                                             Total                   Credit Trading               Core Rates          Emerging Markets                      Other4
in € m.                       2021           2020             2021            2020        2021         2020         2021           2020          2021         2020
Average                      436.6         591.4             118.1          100.2       211.4         347.4        188.3         242.6          (81.2)       (98.7)
Maximum                      604.1         688.8             154.6          147.4       574.5         631.6        267.9         324.9           59.1        (70.0)
Minimum                      292.5         537.3              62.5           50.0        60.1         263.1         84.4          62.8         (224.9)      (147.6)
Period-end                   292.5         560.4              85.4          124.8        78.0         283.6        133.1         250.4           (4.0)       (98.5)
1
    Amounts show the bands within which the values fluctuated during the 12-weeks preceding December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
2
    Business line breakdowns have been updated for 2021 reporting to better reflect the current business structure.
3
    All liquidity horizons are set to 12 months.
4
    Other includes Capital Release Unit.


The incremental risk charge as at the end of 2021 was € 293 million, a decrease of € 268 million (-48 %) compared with year
end 2020. The average of the incremental risk charge as at the end of 2021 was € 437 million and thus € 155 million (-26 %)
lower compared with the average for the period ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in incremental risk charge for 2021
was driven by reduction in European sovereign bond exposures when compared to 2020.


Results of Regulatory Backtesting of Trading Market Risk
In 2021 we observed 1 global outlier under the Historical Simulation model, where our loss on a buy-and-hold basis exceeded
the value-at-risk of our Trading Books, compared with seven outliers in 2020. The outlier was driven by the significant market
stress experienced on China real estate exposures. Also, there were two Actual Backtesting outliers during 2021, which
compares the VaR to Total Income less Fees & Commissions. One of the Actual Backtesting outliers was driven by market
stress on China real estate exposures while the second outlier was due to loss in Investment Bank from an event risk which
is outside the scope of value-at-risk.

Based on the backtesting results, our analysis of the underlying reasons for outliers and enhancements included in our value-
at-risk methodology we continue to believe that our value-at-risk model will remain an appropriate measure for our trading
market risk under normal market conditions. The following graph shows the trading units daily buy-and-hold income in
comparison to the value-at-risk as of the close of the previous business day for the trading days of the reporting period. The
value-at-risk is presented in negative amounts to visually compare the estimated potential loss of our trading positions with
the buy and hold income. Figures are shown in millions of euro. The chart shows that our trading units achieved a positive
buy and hold income for 48 % of the trading days in 2021 (versus 60 % in 2020), as well as displaying the global outliers
experienced in 2021.

The capital requirements for the value-at-risk model, for which the backtesting results are shown here, accounts for 5.6 % of
the total capital requirement for the Group.

EU MR4 – Comparison of VAR estimates with gains/losses
          01/21           02/21      03/21           04/21       05/21          06/21     07/21        08/21      09/21        10/21         11/21       12/21
    125

    100

    75

    50

    25

      0

    -25

    -50

    -75

-100

-125

-150
    in € m.
          Buy-and-hold income of Trading Units
          Actual income of Trading units
          Value-at-Risk




                                                                                                                                                                 155
Deutsche Bank                                                                                                                                                                Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                                                                                                                           Trading Market Risk Exposures




Daily Income of our Trading Units
The following histogram shows the distribution of daily income of our trading units. Daily income is defined as total income
which consists of new trades, fees & commissions, buy & hold income, reserves, carry and other income. It displays the
number of trading days on which we reached each level of trading income shown on the horizontal axis in millions of euro.

Distribution of daily income of our trading units in 2021
 Days


40




30




20




10




 0
                            (50) to (45)
                                           (45) to (40)
                                                          (40) to (35)
                                                                         (35) to (30)
                                                                                        (30) to (25)
                                                                                                       (25) to (20)
                                                                                                                      (20) to (15)
                                                                                                                                     (15) to (10)
               Below (50)




                                                                                                                                                    (10) to (5)


                                                                                                                                                                              0 to 5
                                                                                                                                                                  (5) to 0


                                                                                                                                                                                       5 to 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            95 to 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                 10 to 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                            15 to 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20 to 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25 to 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30 to 35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        35 to 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40 to 45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              45 to 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50 to 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    55 to 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60 to 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65 to 70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70 to 75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                75 to 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           80 to 85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      85 to 90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 90 to 95


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        over 100
     in € m.




Our trading units achieved a positive revenue for 84 % of the trading days in 2021 compared with 90 % in the full year 2020.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        156
Deutsche Bank                                     Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                Nontrading Market Risk Exposures




Nontrading Market Risk Exposures
Economic Capital Usage for Nontrading Market Risk
The following table shows the Nontrading Market Risk economic capital usage by risk type:

Economic Capital Usage by risk type.
                                                                                                                  Economic capital usage
in € m.                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020
Interest rate risk                                                                                             1,853             4,062
Credit spread risk                                                                                                21                92
Equity and Investment risk                                                                                     1,031             1,885
Foreign exchange risk                                                                                          1,509             1,682
Pension risk                                                                                                   1,128               934
Guaranteed funds risk                                                                                             85                41
Total nontrading market risk portfolios                                                                        5,628             8,696



The economic capital figures do take into account diversification benefits between the different risk types.

Economic Capital Usage for Nontrading Market Risk totaled € 5.6 billion as of December 31, 2021, which is € 3.1 billion below
our economic capital usage at year-end 2020.

– Interest rate risk. Economic capital charge for interest rate risk in the banking book, including gap risk, basis risk and option
  risk, such as the risk of a change in client behavior embedded in modelled non-maturity deposits or prepayment risk. In
  total the economic capital usage for December 31, 2021 was € 1,853 million, compared to € 4,062 million for December 31,
  2020. The decrease in economic capital contribution was mainly driven by increased diversification benefit with other risk
  types following changes in the risk aggregation methodology as well as decreased level of interest rate risk exposure in
  our strategic liquidity reserve securities.
– Credit spread risk. Economic capital charge for portfolios in the banking book subject to credit spread risk. Economic capital
  usage was € 21 million as of December 31, 2021, versus € 92 million as of December 31, 2020.
– Equity and Investment risk. Economic capital charge for equity risk from our non-consolidated investment holdings, such
  as our strategic investments and alternative assets, and from a structural short position in our own share price arising from
  our equity compensation plans. The economic capital usage was € 1,031 million as of December 31, 2021, compared with
  € 1,885 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in economic capital contribution was predominately driven by
  changes in the calculation methodology for the equity investment portfolio.
– Foreign exchange risk. Foreign exchange risk predominantly arises from our structural position taken to immunize the
  sensitivity of our capital ratio against changes in the exchange rates. Our economic capital usage was € 1,509 million as
  of December 31, 2021, versus € 1,682 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by changes in the
  calculation methodology.
– Pension risk. This risk arises from our defined benefit obligations, including interest rate risk and inflation risk, credit spread
  risk, equity risk and longevity risk. The economic capital usage was € 1,128 million and € 934 million as of December 31,
  2021 and December 31, 2020 respectively. The economic capital usage increase was mainly driven by a change in the
  interest rate risk position.
– Guaranteed funds risk. Economic capital usage was € 85 million as of December 31, 2021, versus € 41 million as of
  December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                                                    157
Deutsche Bank                                                          Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                     Nontrading Market Risk Exposures




Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book
The following table shows the impact on the Group’s net interest income in the banking book as well as the change of the
economic value for the banking book positions from interest rate changes under the six standard scenarios defined by the
European Banking Authority (EBA) :

Economic value & net interest income interest rate risk in the banking book by EBA scenario
                                                                                                                               Delta EVE                                   Delta NII¹
in € bn.                                                                                               Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020          Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
Parallel up                                                                                                    (3.5)                 (5.2)                  1.4                  2.3
Parallel down                                                                                                    0.1                   0.5                (0.9)                (1.1)
Steepener                                                                                                      (0.0)                 (0.6)                (0.7)                (0.9)
Flattener                                                                                                      (1.3)                 (0.6)                  1.1                  2.1
Short rate up                                                                                                  (1.7)                 (1.7)                  1.7                  2.7
Short rate down                                                                                                  0.4                   0.4                (0.9)                (1.1)
Maximum                                                                                                        (3.5)                 (5.2)                (0.9)                (1.1)

in € bn.                                                                                               Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
Tier 1 Capital                                                                                                 55.4                  51.7
1
    Delta Net Interest Income (NII) reflects the difference between projected NII in the respective scenario with shifted rates vs. market implied rates. Sensitivities are based on a
    static balance sheet at constant exchange rates, excluding trading positions and DWS. Figures do not include Mark to Market (MtM) / Other Comprehensive Income (OCI)
    effects on centrally managed positions not eligible for hedge accounting.


The maximum Economic Value of Equity (EVE) loss was € (3.5) billion as of December 2021, compared to € (5.2) billion as
of December 2020. As per December 2021 the maximum EVE loss represents 6.3 % of Tier 1 Capital.

The maximum Economic Value of Equity (EVE) loss due to a +200 basis points parallel shift of the yield curve across all
currencies as defined by the BaFin was € (3.4) billion as of December 2021, representing 5.4 % of Total Capital.

The decrease in the maximum Economic Value of Equity loss for the ‘Parallel up’ interest rate scenario was partially driven by
improvements in our risk measurement. In particular we extended our modelling assumptions for Non Maturity Deposits and
the TLTRO to better align to the behavior expected in a negative interest rate environment. Such changes are governed by
Deutsche Bank’s Risk and model validation functions and allow for better risk reflection and management.

Additionally changes in risk positions in Deutsche Bank’s pension fund as well the ‘strategic liquidity reserve’ were reducing
the maximum Economic Value of Equity (EVE) loss for that scenario. Those risks are part of the IRRBB framework but are
managed via separate, defined risk management strategies.

The maximum one-year loss in net interest income (NII) was € (0.9) billion as of December 2021, compared to € (1.1) billion
as of December 2020.

The maximum loss for the 12M net interest income sensitivity for the interest rate down scenario was reduced by circa € 0.2
billion.

Deutsche Bank manages NII sensitivity with a goal to stabilize and enhance earnings. Additional measures implemented in
2021 by business divisions to reprice our deposit base as well as active risk management strategies have helped to enhance
earnings and reduce NII risk, while at same time allowing to keep upside potential.

The following table shows the variation of the economic value for Deutsche Bank’s banking book positions resulting from
downward and upward interest rate shocks by currency:

Economic value interest rate risk in the banking book by currency
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021
in € bn.                                                                                                                                             Parallel up       Parallel down
EUR                                                                                                                                                        (2.4)                (0.2)
USD                                                                                                                                                        (1.0)                 0.4
Other                                                                                                                                                      (0.1)                (0.1)
Total                                                                                                                                                      (3.5)                 0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                 158
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Operational risk exposure




Operational risk exposure
Operational risk – risk profile
Operational risk losses by event type (profit and loss view)
in € m.                                                                                                                                         2021                2020¹
Clients, Products and Business Practices                                                                                                         402                 232
Internal Fraud                                                                                                                                    72                  44
Execution, Delivery and Process Management                                                                                                        52                  55
Others                                                                                                                                            28                   8
External Fraud                                                                                                                                    12                  16
Natural Disasters and Public Safety                                                                                                                7                  47
Group                                                                                                                                            573                 401
1
    2020 loss figures revised from prior year presentation due to subsequent capture of losses and reclassification.


As of December 31, 2021, operational losses increased by € 172 million (43 %) year on year, predominantly driven by
increases in “Clients, Products and Business Practices”. Whilst the main contributors were provisions arising from civil litigation
and regulatory enforcement, a key driver stems from court decisions in relation to applicability of specific terms in standar d
contracts for customers, which also has a wider impact on the industry. Losses related to "Internal Fraud" also increased by
€ 28 million (64 %) year on year. COVID-19 related expenses were not repeated in 2021, which explains the decrease in
expenses for "Natural Disasters and Public Safety". Losses in the remaining event types remained stable year-on-year.

Operational losses by event type occurred in the period 2021 (2016 - 2020)1

    Distribution of Operational Losses (posting date)                                         Frequency of Operational Losses (first posting date)


    2% (2%)                                                                1% (1%)            1% (1%)                                                            1% (1%)
    External Fraud                                                  Natural Disasters         Natural Disasters                                                    Others
                                                                    and Public Safety         and Public Safety
    5% (2%)
    Others
                                                                                              10% (30%)
                                                                                              Clients, Products and
                                                                                              Business Practices
    9% (11%)
    Execution, Delivery
    and Process Mgmt                                                                          12% (9%)
                                                                                              Execution, Delivery
                                                                                              and Process Mgmt
    13% (23%)
    Internal Fraud



                                                                       70% (61%)               0% (0%)                                                    75% (59%)
                                           Clients, Products and Business Practices            Internal Fraud                                             External Fraud


1
    Percentages in brackets correspond to loss frequency respectively to loss amount for losses occurred in 2016-2020 period. Frequency and amounts can change
    subsequently.


“Distribution of Operational Losses” (above left) summarizes the proportion of operational risk loss postings by event type
using the P&L value in 2021, against the average for the comparative five-year period 2016-2020 (in brackets). The event
type “Clients, Products and Business Practices” dominates operational losses with a share of 70 % and is comprised mainly
of outflows related to litigation, investigations and enforcement actions (as mentioned above).

“Frequency of Operational Losses” (above right) summarizes the proportion of operational risk events by event type (based
on a count of events where losses were first recognized in 2021), against the average for the comparative five-year period
2016-2020 (in brackets). The highest event type frequency, “External Fraud”, made up 75 % of all observed loss events.
Although this event type contributed significantly to the frequency distribution of event losses in 2021, it made a negligible
contribution to financial value of total loss events in 2021.

Whilst we seek to ensure the comprehensive capture of all operational risk loss events with a P&L impact of € 10,000 or
greater, the totals shown in this section may be underestimated due to delayed detection and recording of loss events.




                                                                                                                                                                     159
Deutsche Bank                                      Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                 Liquidity Risk Exposure




Liquidity Risk Exposure
Funding Markets and Capital Markets Issuance
In 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic remained in focus and markets kept reacting sensitive to pandemic-related news. Despite
this macroeconomic uncertainty, the Bank continued the idiosyncratic tightening and successfully executed the 2021 Issuance
Plan of € 15-20 billion, comprising debt issuance with an original maturity in excess of one year.

Looking at the Bank’s credit performance, Senior Non-Preferred cash bonds outperformed peers significantly throughout 2021.
Supported by rating upgrades from Moody’s, Fitch and S&P, the Bank’s credit rallied and continuously narrowed the delta to
our European peers. At year end, the SNP delta to peers trades tighter than at any time in 2021.

The Group concluded 2021 having raised € 19.7 billion in term funding. This funding was broadly spread across the funding
sources as follows: AT1 issuance (€ 2.5 billion), Tier 2 issuance (€ 1.1 billion), Senior non-preferred plain-vanilla issuance (€
9.6 billion), senior preferred plain-vanilla issuance (€ 4.0 billion) and other senior preferred structured issuance (€ 2.5 billion).
The € 19.7 billion total is divided into €o (€ 6.8 billion), USD (€ 11.3 billion), GBP (€ 0.7 billion) and other currencies aggregated
(€ 0.9 billion).

The Group’s investor base for 2021 issuances comprised of asset managers and pension funds (60 %), retail customers (5 %),
banks (7 %), governments and agencies (0 %), insurance companies (6 %) and other institutional investors (21 %). The
geographical distribution was split between Germany (12 %), rest of Europe (33 %), U.S. (36 %), Asia/Pacific (16 %) and
Other (3 %). The average spread of issuance over 3-months-Euribor / Libor / Risk Free Rates was 161 basis points for the full
year. The average tenor was 5.7 years. Despite an increased issuance activity in Q4, total issuances were higher in the first
half of the year than in the second. The Group issued the following volumes over each quarter: Q1: € 7.0 billion, Q2: € 5.0
billion, Q3: € 1.3 billion and Q4: € 6.3 billion, respectively.

In 2022, our issuance plan is € 15-20 billion and comprises capital instruments, senior non-preferred, senior preferred and
covered bonds. We also plan to raise a portion of this funding in U.S. dollar and may enter into cross currency swaps to
manage any residual requirements. We have total capital markets maturities, excluding legally exercisable calls, of
approximately € 12 billion in 2022.


Funding Diversification
In 2021, total external funding increased by € 51.5 billion from € 886.2 billion at December 31, 2020 to € 937.7 billion at
December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by inflows in the Corporate Bank, where deposits increased by
€ 17.8 billion. DB’s most stable deposits in the Private Bank increased by € 12.7 billion predominately within the International
Private Bank. In addition, secured funding and shorts increased by € 25.0 billion due to increased client demand and market
opportunities as well as DB’s participation in ECB’s TLTRO III programme. Furthermore, targeted deposit inflows of
€ 5.9 billion led to higher unsecured wholesale funding. The € 9.9 billion decrease of Capital Markets and Equity outstanding
relate to lower long-term debt mainly due to maturities exceeding new issuances partially offset by higher equity and additional
AT1 issuance.

With the disclosure of the regulatory Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), DB has discontinued the disclosure of the internal
Most Stable Funding Ratio (MSFR).




                                                                                                                                 160
Deutsche Bank                                                         Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                    Liquidity Risk Exposure




Composition of External Funding Sources
    in € mn.
    350
                                              314
                                        301
    300
                                                                      271
                                                                253
    250


    200
                 175
                       165
                                                                                                                                               154
    150
                                                                                                                                         129

    100


      50
                                                                                         15 15                    13 19
                                                                                                                                                                     0    0
       0
                20% 18%               34% 33%                  29% 29%                  2% 2%                    1% 2%                  15% 16%                  0% 0%
               Capital Markets        Private Bank              Corporate                 Other                 Unsecured            Secured Funding                Financing
                 and Equity                                       Bank                  Customers¹              Wholesale              and Shorts                   Vehicles

           December 31, 2020: total € 886.2 billion
           December 31, 2021: total € 937.7 billion
1
  Other Customers includes fiduciary deposits, X-markets notes and margin/Prime Brokerage cash balances (shown on a net basis).
Reference: Reconciliation to total balance sheet of € 1,324.0 billion (€ 1,325.3 billion): Derivatives & settlement balances € 306.8 billion (€ 348.2 billion), add-back for netting
effect for margin/Prime Brokerage cash balances (shown on a net basis) € 49.0 billion (€ 63.4 billion), other non-funding liabilities € 30.5 billion (€ 27.4 billion) for December 31,
2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.



Maturity of unsecured wholesale funding, ABCP and capital markets issuance1
                                                                                                                                                                         Dec 31, 2021
                                                             Over               Over              Over                                   Over
                                                          1 month           3 months          6 months                                 1 year
                                       Not more            but not            but not           but not            Sub-total          but not
                                           than          more than          more than         more than            less than        more than                Over
in € m.                                 1 month          3 months           6 months             1 year               1 year          2 years             2 years                Total
Deposits from banks                       1,556                572                447                490             3,065                  63                 52               3,180
Deposits from other
wholesale customers                       4,577             3,944              1,178              2,276             11,975                617                957               13,549
CDs and CP                                  242               288              1,009              1,014              2,553                  0                  0                2,553
ABCP                                          0                 0                  0                  0                  0                  0                  0                    0
Senior non-preferred
plain vanilla                             1,375             2,932              1,836              2,590              8,733              6,259            37,858                52,850
Senior preferred
plain vanilla                                 3                39                 38                  9                 89              3,394             2,520                 6,003
Senior structured                           105               487                546              1,471              2,610              2,325            10,162                15,096
Covered bonds/ABS                           110               151                723                361              1,345              1,509            11,356                14,210
Subordinated liabilities                      0                 0              2,016                280              2,296              1,336            13,949                17,581
Other                                       213                 0                  0                  0                213                  0                 0                   213
Total                                     8,180             8,413              7,794              8,491             32,878             15,503            76,854               125,234
  Of which:
  Secured                                   110               151                723                361              1,345              1,509            11,356                14,210
  Unsecured                               8,070             8,262              7,070              8,130             31,533             13,994            65,497               111,024
1
 Includes additional Tier 1 notes reported as additional equity components in the financial statements. Liabilities with call features are shown at earliest legally exercisable call
 date. No assumption is made as to whether such calls would be exercised.
Secured funding volume reported post own debt elimination.


The total volume of unsecured wholesale liabilities, ABCP and capital markets issuance maturing within one year amount to
€ 31 billion as of December 31, 2021, and should be viewed in the context of our total Liquidity Reserves of € 241 billion.




                                                                                                                                                                                  161
Deutsche Bank                                                    Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                               Liquidity Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                         Dec 31, 2020
                                                         Over             Over              Over                            Over
                                                      1 month         3 months          6 months                          1 year
                               Not more                but not          but not           but not      Sub-total         but not
                                   than              more than        more than         more than      less than       more than              Over
in € m.                         1 month              3 months         6 months             1 year         1 year         2 years           2 years              Total
Deposits from banks                  964                1,063              779               547         3,354                162              78              3,594
Deposits from other
wholesale customers                 1,626               1,326              407               986         4,344                409           1,162              5,914
CDs and CP                            693                 466              887               753         2,800                  0              21              2,821
ABCP                                    0                   0                0                 0             0                  0               0                  0
Senior non-preferred
plain vanilla                       3,689               3,970            2,349             8,291       18,298                8,235         34,106            60,639
Senior preferred
plain vanilla                          15                   0                5            1,698         1,718                   85          1,955             3,759
Senior structured                     544                 416              917            1,465         3,343                2,310         12,021            17,674
Covered bonds/ABS                      70               1,179              786            1,966         4,001                1,337         17,303            22,641
Subordinated liabilities                0                   0              538              531         1,069                1,765         11,437            14,271
Other                                 137                   0                0                0           137                    0            695               832
Total                               7,738               8,420            6,668           16,237        39,063               14,303         78,779           132,145
  Of which:
  Secured                              70               1,179              786            1,966         4,001                1,337         17,303            22,641
  Unsecured                         7,668               7,241            5,882           14,271        35,063               12,966         61,476           109,505


The following table shows the currency breakdown of our short-term unsecured wholesale funding, of our ABCP funding and
of our capital markets issuance.

Unsecured wholesale funding, ABCP and capital markets issuance (currency breakdown)
                                                                                    Dec 31,2021                                                          Dec 31,2020
                                                                         in other                                                            in other
in € m.                    in EUR           in USD         in GBP          CCYs           Total     in EUR         in USD        in GBP        CCYs             Total
Deposits from
banks                        986              797            414            984          3,180        963           2,222            149        261            3,594
Deposits from
other whole-
sale customers              3,346           7,946            201          2,055         13,549       4,474           989              90        361            5,914
CDs and CP                  1,370             837              0            345          2,553       1,082           715             365        658            2,821
ABCP                            0               0              0              0              0           0             0               0          0                0
Senior non-preferred
plain vanilla              25,583       21,244             2,297          3,726         52,850      29,700         25,122        1,833        3,984          60,639
Senior preferred
plain vanilla               1,989           3,838                 0         176          6,003       1,894          1,635             0         230           3,759
Senior structured           6,720           6,395                12       1,970         15,096       7,725          7,972            14       1,963          17,674
Covered bonds/
ABS                        14,210               0                 0            0        14,210      22,641             0               0             0       22,641
Subordinated
liabilities                 8,396        8,216               774            195        17,581        4,693          3,577            0        6,001          14,271
Other                         213            0                 0              0           213          832              0            0            0             832
Total                      62,813       49,272             3,698          9,451       125,234       74,004         42,232        2,451       13,458         132,145
   Of which:
   Secured                 14,210            0                 0              0        14,210       22,641              0            0            0          22,641
   Unsecured               48,603       49,272             3,698          9,451       111,024       51,363         42,232        2,451       13,458         109,505




                                                                                                                                                                 162
Deutsche Bank                                               Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                          Liquidity Risk Exposure




Liquidity Reserves
Composition of our liquidity reserves by parent company (including branches) and subsidiaries
                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021                        Dec 31, 2020
in € bn.                                                                              Carrying Value   Liquidity Value   Carrying Value    Liquidity Value
Available cash and cash equivalents (held primarily at central banks)                          181               181               155               155
  Parent (incl. foreign branches)                                                              144               144               130               130
  Subsidiaries                                                                                  37                37                25                25
Highly liquid securities (includes government, government
guaranteed and agency securities)                                                               40                40                62                62
  Parent (incl. foreign branches)                                                               20                20                42                41
  Subsidiaries                                                                                  20                20                20                20
Other unencumbered central bank eligible securities                                             20                18                26                24
  Parent (incl. foreign branches)                                                               15                13                21                19
  Subsidiaries                                                                                   5                 5                 5                 5
Total liquidity reserves                                                                       241               239               243               241
  Parent (incl. foreign branches)                                                              179               177               192               191
  Subsidiaries                                                                                  62                62                51                50


As of December 31, 2021, our liquidity reserves amounted to € 241 billion compared with € 243 billion as of December 31,
2020. The decrease of € 2 billion comprised approximately a € 26 billion increase in cash and cash equivalents, offset by a
decrease of € 22 billion in highly liquid securities and € 6 billion increase in other unencumbered securities. The development
was primarily driven by increased lending activity partially and matured capital market issuances offset by additional
participation in the ECB’s TLTRO and higher deposits. The quarterly average of our Liquidity Reserves for this year is
€ 247 billion compared with € 233 billion during 2020. In the table above the carrying value represents the market value of our
Liquidity Reserves while the liquidity value reflects our assumption of the value that could be obtained, primarily through
secured funding, taking into account the experience observed in secured funding markets at times of stress.


Liquidity Coverage Ratio
The year-end LCR as of December 31, 2021 stands at 133.1 % compared to 144.8 % as of December 31, 2020.

Our twelve month weighted average LCR continues to be 142 %. This has been calculated in accordance with the Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 and the EBA Guidelines on LCR disclosure to complement the disclosure of liquidity risk
management under Article 435 CRR.

LCR components
                                                                                                                          Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                          Total adjusted    Total adjusted
                                                                                                                         weighted value    weighted value
in € bn. (unless stated otherwise)                                                                                            (average)         (average)
Number of data points used in the calculation of averages                                                                          12                12
High Quality Liquid Assets                                                                                                        220               207
Total net cash outflows                                                                                                           155               146
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) in %                                                                                             142 %             142 %


Funding Risk Management

Structural Funding
All funding matrices (the aggregate currency, the USD and the GBP funding matrix) were in line with the respective risk
appetite as of year ends 2021 and 2020.


Stress Testing and Scenario Analysis
At the end of 2021 our stressed Net Liquidity Position stood at € 48 billion compared to €43 billion as at the end of 2020. The
predominant driver of the increase was a change in presentation of available excess liquidity maintained at branches and
subsidiaries within the Group where limited liquidity transfer restrictions exist. Previous, excess balances were not shown in
the Group’s sNLP metric, but are now being reflected. The impact of this presentational change was €16 billion and was partly
offset by methodology changes and business activities. Without the presentational change the SNLP at the end of 2021 would
have been €32 bn.




                                                                                                                                                      163
Deutsche Bank                                                        Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                   Liquidity Risk Exposure




Global All Currency Daily Stress Testing Results
                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                                 Dec 31, 2020
                                                               Funding                  Gap         Net Liquidity       Funding          Gap      Net Liquidity
in € bn.                                                         Gap¹               Closure²            Position          Gap1       Closure2         Position
Systemic market risk                                               100                  220                 119              82          189              107
1 notch downgrade (DB specific)                                     78                  220                 141              17          145              128
Severe downgrade (DB specific)                                     152                  240                  88             157          216               59
Combined3                                                          195                  243                  48             177          220               43
1
    Funding gap caused by impaired rollover of liabilities and other projected outflows.
2
    Based on liquidity generation through Liquidity Reserves and other business mitigants.
3
    Combined impact of systemic market risk and severe downgrade.


Global EUR Daily Stress Testing Results
                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                                 Dec 31, 2020
                                                               Funding                  Gap         Net Liquidity       Funding          Gap      Net Liquidity
in € bn.                                                         Gap¹               Closure²            Position          Gap1       Closure2         Position
Combined³                                                           91                  112                  21              86          104                18
1
    Funding gap caused by impaired rollover of liabilities and other projected outflows.
2
    Based on liquidity generation through Liquidity Reserves and other business mitigants.
3
    Combined impact of systemic market risk and severe downgrade.


Global USD Daily Stress Testing Results
                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                                 Dec 31, 2020
                                                               Funding                  Gap         Net Liquidity       Funding          Gap      Net Liquidity
in € bn.                                                         Gap¹               Closure²            Position          Gap1       Closure2         Position
Combined³                                                           78                   88                  10              60           64                 4
1
    Funding gap caused by impaired rollover of liabilities and other projected outflows.
2
    Based on liquidity generation through Liquidity Reserves and other business mitigants.
3
    Combined impact of systemic market risk and severe downgrade.


Global GBP Daily Stress Testing Results
                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                                 Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                    Net Liquidity       Funding          Gap      Net Liquidity
in € bn.                                                  Funding Gap¹         Gap Closure²             Position           Gap        Closure         Position
Combined³                                                             4                      8                 4              4           10                 6
1
    Funding gap caused by impaired rollover of liabilities and other projected outflows.
2
    Based on liquidity generation through Liquidity Reserves and other business mitigants.
3
    Combined impact of systemic market risk and severe downgrade.


The following table presents the amount needed to meet collateral requirements from contractual obligations in the event of a
one- or two-notch downgrade by rating agencies for all currencies.

Contractual Obligations
                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021                 Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                      One-notch        Two-notch    One-notch       Two-notch
in € m.                                                                                              downgrade        downgrade    downgrade       downgrade
Contractual derivatives funding or margin requirements                                                      205             294          354              439
Other contractual funding or margin requirements                                                              0               0            0                0


Net stable funding ratio
The NSFR requires banks to maintain a stable funding profile in relation to their on- and off-balance sheet activities. The ratio
is defined as the amount of Available Stable Funding (the portion of capital and liabilities expected to be a stable source of
funding), relative to the amount of Required Stable Funding (a function of the liquidity characteristics of various assets held).

The Capital Requirements Regulation II (“CRR2”), the regulation which defines and implements the NSFR for the EU, was
finalized in June 2019 and is effective from June 28, 2021.

The NSFR as of December 31, 2021 calculated in accordance with the CRR2 stands at 121 %, or € 105 billion of excess over
regulatory minimum of 100 %.Net stable funding ratio

                                                                                                                                                 Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                 Total adjusted
                                                                                                                                                weighted value
in € bn. (unless stated otherwise)
Available stable funding (ASF)                                                                                                                           602
Required stable funding (RSF)                                                                                                                            498
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) in %                                                                                                                   121 %




                                                                                                                                                           164
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                  Liquidity Risk Exposure




Asset Encumbrance
This section refers to asset encumbrance in the group of institutions consolidated for banking regulatory purposes pursuant
to the German Banking Act. Therefore this excludes insurance companies or companies outside the finance sector. Assets
pledged by our insurance subsidiaries are included in Note 20 “Assets Pledged and Received as Collateral” of the consolidated
financial statements, and restricted assets held to satisfy obligations to insurance companies’ policy holders are included
within Note 37 “Information on Subsidiaries” of the consolidated financial statements.

Encumbered assets primarily comprise those on- and off-balance sheet assets that are pledged as collateral against secured
funding, collateral swaps, and other collateralized obligations. Additionally, in line with EBA technical standards on regulatory
asset encumbrance reporting, assets placed with settlement systems, including default funds and initial margins, as well as
other assets pledged which cannot be freely withdrawn such as mandatory minimum reserves at central banks, are considered
encumbered. We also include derivative margin receivable assets as encumbered under these EBA guidelines.

Readily available assets are those on- and off-balance sheet assets that are not otherwise encumbered, and which are in
freely transferrable form. Unencumbered financial assets at fair value, other than securities borrowed or purchased under
resale agreements and positive market value from derivatives, and available for sale investments are all assumed to be
readily available.

The readily available value represents the on- and off-balance sheet carrying amount or fair value rather than any form of
stressed liquidity value (see the “Liquidity Reserves” for an analysis of unencumbered liquid assets available under a liquidity
stress scenario). Other unencumbered on- and off-balance sheet assets are those assets that have not been pledged as
collateral against secured funding or other collateralized obligations, or are otherwise not considered to be readily available.
Included in this category are securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements and positive market value from
derivatives. Similarly, for loans and other advances to customers, these would only be viewed as readily available to the extent
they are already in a pre-packaged transferrable format, and have not already been used to generate funding. This represents
the most conservative view given that an element of such loans currently shown in Other assets could be packaged into a
format that would be suitable for use to generate funding.

Encumbered and unencumbered assets
                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                               Carrying value
                                                                                                                                                       Unencumbered assets
in € m.                                                                                                                Encumbered               Readily
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                               Assets              assets             available                 Other
Debt securities                                                                                            131                  66                   65                      0
Equity instruments                                                                                           6                   1                    5                      0
Other assets:
  Cash and due from banks & Interest earning deposits with Banks                                           199                  14                  186                      0
  Securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements¹                                                  8                   0                    0                      8
  Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss²
    Trading assets                                                                                          10                   0                   10                     0
    Positive market value from derivative financial instruments                                            300                   0                    0                   300
    Securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements¹                                               78                   0                    0                    78
    Other financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                              1                   0                    1                     0
  Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income²                                         6                   0                    4                     1
  Loans                                                                                                    513                  86                    6                   420
  Other assets                                                                                              73                  45                    0                    29
Total                                                                                                    1,325                 212                  277                   836
1
    Securities borrowed and securities purchased under resale agreements are all shown as other unencumbered. The use of the underlying collateral is separately captured in
    the off-balance sheet table below.
2
    Excludes Debt securities and Equity instruments (separately disclosed above).


                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                              Fair value of collateral received
                                                                                                                                                       Unencumbered assets
in € m.                                                                                                                Encumbered               Readily
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                               Assets              assets             available                 Other
Collateral received:                                                                                       260                 223                   35                      2
  Debt securities                                                                                          254                 219                   35                      0
  Equity instruments                                                                                         4                   4                    0                      0
  Other collateral received                                                                                  2                   0                    0                      2




                                                                                                                                                                           165
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                  Liquidity Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                               Carrying value
                                                                                                                                                       Unencumbered assets
in € m.                                                                                                                Encumbered               Readily
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                               Assets              assets             available                 Other
Debt securities                                                                                            156                   61                  95                      0
Equity instruments                                                                                          13                    6                   7                      0
Other assets:
  Cash and due from banks & Interest earning deposits with Banks                                           175                   13                 162                      0
  Securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements¹                                                  9                    0                   0                      9
  Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss²
    Trading assets                                                                                           9                   0                    9                     0
    Positive market value from derivative financial instruments                                            344                   0                    0                   344
    Securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements¹                                               63                   0                    0                    63
    Other financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                              3                   0                    3                     0
  Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income²                                         6                   0                    5                     2
  Loans                                                                                                    459                  83                    3                   373
  Other assets                                                                                              90                  55                    0                    35
Total                                                                                                    1,326                 218                  282                   825
1
    Securities borrowed and securities purchased under resale agreements are all shown as other unencumbered. The use of the underlying collateral is separately captured in
    the off-balance sheet table below.
2
    Excludes Debt securities and Equity instruments (separately disclosed above).


                                                                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                              Fair value of collateral received
                                                                                                                                                       Unencumbered assets
in € m.                                                                                                                Encumbered               Readily
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                               Assets              assets             available                 Other
Collateral received:                                                                                       237                 199                   36                      2
  Debt securities                                                                                          193                 159                   34                      0
  Equity instruments                                                                                        42                  40                    2                      0
  Other collateral received                                                                                  2                   0                    0                      2




Maturity Analysis of Assets and Financial Liabilities
Treasury manages the maturity analysis of assets and liabilities. Modeling of assets and liabilities is necessary in cases where
the contractual maturity does not adequately reflect the liquidity risk position. The most significant example in this context
would be immediately repayable deposits from retail and transaction banking customers which have consistently displayed
high stability throughout even the most severe financial crises.

The modeling profiles are part of the overall liquidity risk management framework (see section “Liquidity Stress Testing and
Scenario Analysis” for short-term liquidity positions ≤ 1 year and section “Structural Funding” for long-term liquidity positions
> 1 year) which is defined and approved by the Management Board.




                                                                                                                                                                           166
Deutsche Bank                                                       Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                  Liquidity Risk Exposure




The following tables present a maturity analysis of our total assets based on carrying value and upon earliest legally
exercisable maturity as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

Analysis of the earliest contractual maturity of assets
                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021
                                               On
                                         demand                         Over          Over         Over          Over           Over         Over
                                            (incl.                   1 month      3 months     6 months      9 months         1 year      2 years
                                        Overnight                       to no        but no       but no        but no        but no       but no
                                              and        Up to          more          more         more          more          more         more
                                         one day           one           than          than         than          than          than         than          Over
in € m.                                   notice)        month      3 months      6 months     9 months         1 year       2 years      5 years       5 years          Total
Cash and central bank
balances1                                186,020         5,513           488             0             0             0            0             0             0      192,021
Interbank balances
(w/o central banks)1                       6,153           641           191           120          119           114             0             0             4         7,342
Central bank funds sold                        0             0             0             0            0             0             0             0             0             0
Securities purchased under
resale agreements                             178        1,979         2,042           569          992           144           831        1,633              0         8,368
   With banks                                 168        1,375           740           303          277             8           629        1,611              0         5,111
   With customers                              10          604         1,302           266          715           136           202           23              0         3,257
Securities borrowed                             0           63             0             0            0             0             0            0              0            63
   With banks                                   0            0             0             0            0             0             0            0              0             0
   With customers                               0           63             0             0            0             0             0            0              0            63
Financial assets at fair value
through profit or loss                   420,971        47,776         7,155        2,514          1,190        3,577           747        1,966         5,336       491,233
   Trading assets                        100,079             0            76            0              0        1,815             0            4           423       102,396
      Fixed-income securities
      and loans                           94,607              0             0            0             0             0            0             0          130        94,737
      Equities and other variable-
      income securities                    4,801              0           76             0             0        1,815             0             4          293          6,989
      Other trading assets                   671              0            0             0             0            0             0             0            0            671
   Positive market values from
   derivative financial
   instruments                           299,732              0             0            0             0             0            0             0             0      299,732
   Non-trading financial assets
   mandatory at fair value
   through profit or loss                 21,155        47,776         7,079        2,514          1,142        1,762           663        1,962         4,912        88,965
      Securities purchased under
      resale agreements                    6,373        44,027         5,850        1,934           895           202            56          594              0       59,931
      Securities borrowed                 14,777         2,829           663           86             0             0             0            0              0       18,355
      Fixed-income securities
      and loans                                  5         198           374           415          242           726           437        1,228         4,125          7,750
      Other non-trading financial
      assets mandatory at fair
      value through profit or loss               0         722           193            79             4          834           170          140           787          2,929
   Financial assets designated
   at fair value through profit or
   loss                                          6            0             0            0            48             0           84             1             1           140
Positive market values from
derivative financial instruments
qualifying for hedge accounting                  0         124            57           103            11           92            25          223           469          1,106
Financial assets at fair value
through other comprehensive
income                                           0       2,188         1,897        1,281           890           738        2,236         5,970       13,778         28,979
   Securities purchased under
   resale agreements                           0         1,231            0             0             0            0             0             0            0          1,231
   Securities borrowed                         0             0            0             0             0            0             0             0            0              0
   Debt securities                             0           502          950           689           532          626         1,772         4,560       13,746         23,377
   Loans                                       0           455          947           593           358          112           464         1,410           32          4,370
   Other                                       0             0            0             0             0            0             0             0            0              0
Loans                                     16,962        39,291       27,993        23,939        11,882       12,449        29,518        89,735      219,550        471,319
   To banks                                  282           885          899           503           274          183           441         3,387          753          7,607
   To customers                           16,680        38,406       27,095        23,436        11,609       12,265        29,077        86,348      218,796        463,712
      Retail                               2,782         5,143        4,262         2,092         1,071        2,209         4,337        16,256      171,602        209,754
      Corporates and other
      customers                           13,898       33,263        22,833        21,343        10,537       10,056        24,740       70,093        47,195        253,958
Other financial assets                    65,378        7,742         1,223         1,206         1,322        3,306         4,879        3,968         8,022         97,046
Total financial assets                   695,661      105,317        41,047        29,732        16,406       20,420        38,237      103,496       247,160       1,297,477
Other assets                               8,445        1,258             1         2,118            31        2,576           130        1,372        10,585         26,516
Total assets                             704,106      106,575        41,048        31,851        16,437       22,996        38,367      104,868       257,744       1,323,993
1
    The positions “Cash and central bank balances” and “Interbank balances (w/o central banks)” include € 526 million cash held with Russian Banks, predominantly with the
    Central Bank of Russia.




                                                                                                                                                                          167
Deutsche Bank                                                           Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                                      Liquidity Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2020
                                                  On
                                            demand                          Over           Over          Over           Over           Over          Over
                                               (incl.                    1 month       3 months      6 months       9 months         1 year       2 years
                                           Overnight                        to no         but no        but no         but no        but no        but no
                                                 and         Up to          more           more          more           more          more          more
                                            one day            one           than           than          than           than          than          than           Over
in € m.                                      notice)         month      3 months       6 months      9 months          1 year       2 years       5 years        5 years          Total
Cash and central bank
balances                                   163,953          2,165              32            39             13              6             0              0             0      166,208
Interbank balances
(w/o central banks)                           7,106         1,239            470            138             95            71              0              0            11         9,130
Central bank funds sold                           0             0              0              0              0             0              0              0             0             0
Securities purchased under
resale agreements                               151         2,111          1,378            765             84           237         2,212         1,593               0         8,533
   With banks                                   137         1,578            206            508             64             0         1,529         1,505               0         5,527
   With customers                                14           533          1,172            257             20           237           683            88               0         3,005
Securities borrowed                               0             0              0              0              0             0             0             0               0             0
   With banks                                     0             0              0              0              0             0             0             0               0             0
   With customers                                 0             0              0              0              0             0             0             0               0             0
Financial assets at fair value
through profit or loss                     462,636         39,834          6,189         2,971            593         3,391          1,898         4,063          6,366       527,941
   Trading assets                          104,766            291              0             0              0         2,480             83             0            309       107,929
      Fixed-income securities
      and loans¹                            91,353             291              0              0             0        2,480              83              0          119        94,326
      Equities and other variable-
      income securities¹                    11,579                0             0              0             0              0             0              0          190        11,769
      Other trading assets                   1,833                0             0              0             0              0             0              0            0         1,833
   Positive market values from
   derivative financial
   instruments                             343,455                0             0              0             0              0             0              0             0      343,455
   Non-trading financial assets
   mandatory at fair value
   through profit or loss                   14,415         39,543          6,189         2,971            593            912         1,461         3,980          6,057        76,121
      Securities purchased under
      resale agreements                      3,649         32,309          5,052         2,848            560             97           373         1,169               0       46,057
      Securities borrowed                   10,532          5,752            721             0              0              0             4             0               0       17,009
      Fixed-income securities
      and loans¹                                198         1,188            399            117              6           278           997         2,691          5,678        11,553
      Other non-trading financial
      assets mandatory at fair
      value through profit or loss¹               36           294             16              6            27           536             88           121           378          1,503
   Financial assets designated
   at fair value through profit or
   loss                                            0              0             0              0             0              0          353             83              1           437
Positive market values from
derivative financial instruments
qualifying for hedge accounting                    0           528           622            350           131             71           215            258         1,129          3,303
Financial assets at fair value
through other comprehensive
income                                             5        3,013          3,182         3,059          3,304         1,831          8,436        11,271        21,735         55,834
   Securities purchased under
   resale agreements                             0          1,543             0              0              0             0             0              0             0          1,543
   Securities borrowed                           0              0             0              0              0             0             0              0             0              0
   Debt securities                               0          1,167         2,621          2,684          2,963         1,653         7,633          9,252        21,683         49,656
   Loans                                         5            303           561            374            341           179           803          2,019            52          4,635
   Other                                         0              0             0              0              0             0             0              0             0              0
Loans                                       13,792         41,904        19,375         15,763          9,482        11,575        28,140         75,957       211,005        426,995
   To banks                                    270            693           744            577            235           384           258          1,602           751          5,514
   To customers                             13,522         41,210        18,632         15,186          9,247        11,191        27,882         74,355       210,255        421,480
      Retail                                 2,288          8,222         3,226          1,817          1,100         1,262         4,955         16,034       164,343        203,246
      Corporates and other
      customers                             11,234        32,988         15,406         13,369         8,148          9,929        22,927        58,321         45,912        218,234
Other financial assets                      73,415         7,766          1,362          1,112           430          2,207         2,073         6,867          1,560         96,791
Total financial assets                     721,057        98,560         32,611         24,197        14,133         19,390        42,975       100,008        241,806       1,294,736
Other assets                                13,892         1,599              1          1,672             9          1,983           211         1,406          9,749         30,523
Total assets                               734,950       100,159         32,612         25,869        14,142         21,373        43,186       101,414        251,555       1,325,259
1
    Numbers have been restated reflecting a reclassification of certain investment certificates from “fixed-income securities and loans” to “equities and other variable-income
    securities” as part of trading assets, and from “fixed-income securities and loans” to “other non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss” as part of
    non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss, to the tune of € 2.5 billion and € 1.2 billion, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                   168
Deutsche Bank                                              Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                         Liquidity Risk Exposure




The following tables present a maturity analysis of our total liabilities based on carrying value and upon earliest legally
exercisable maturity as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

Analysis of the earliest contractual maturity of liabilities
                                                                                                                                             Dec 31, 2021
                                           On
                                     demand                    Over        Over         Over          Over       Over      Over
                                         (incl.             1 month    3 months     6 months      9 months     1 year   2 years
                                        Over-                  to no      but no       but no        but no    but no    but no
                                    night and      Up to       more        more         more          more      more      more
                                     one day         one        than        than         than          than      than      than       Over
in € m.                                notice)     month   3 months    6 months     9 months         1 year   2 years   5 years    5 years          Total
Deposits                            393,371       23,033    95,474       49,687      10,775         9,937      4,726     7,095      9,652       603,750
   Due to banks                      42,195        2,312     8,091        9,328       5,619         1,637      2,374     5,105      7,652        84,315
   Due to customers                 351,176       20,721    87,383       40,359       5,156         8,299      2,352     1,989      1,999       519,435
      Retail                        158,038        3,040    59,964       28,293         889           745        416       495        127       252,006
      Corporates and other
      customers                     193,138       17,681    27,419       12,066           4,267     7,555      1,936     1,494      1,873       267,429
Trading liabilities                 341,827            0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0       341,827
   Trading securities                54,235            0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0        54,235
   Other trading liabilities            483            0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0           483
   Negative market values from
   derivative financial
   instruments                      287,108           0           0            0             0           0         0         0          0       287,108
Financial liabilities designed at
fair value through profit or loss    12,038       22,809     4,219          648      13,987         2,114       376      1,497       780         58,468
   Securities sold under
   repurchase agreements             10,802       22,069     4,077          548      13,855         1,950         1          3        58         53,364
   Long-term debt                     1,008            0        35           36          87            59       368      1,439       667          3,699
   Other financial liabilities
   designated at fair value
   through profit or loss                228        740        106           64             44        105          7        54         56          1,404
Investment contract liabilities            0          0          0            0              0        562          0         0          0            562
Negative market values from
derivative financial instruments
qualifying for hedge accounting              0      317        362          187            188          48        34      252          79          1,467
Central bank funds purchased                 0        0          0            0              0           0         0        0           0              0
Securities sold under
repurchase agreements                    226           2        30           39               1         0        440         2          8           747
   Due to banks                          218           1        28           37               1         0        440         0          3           727
   Due to customers                        8           2         2            2               0         0          0         2          5            21
Securities loaned                         24           0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0            24
   Due to banks                            6           0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0             6
   Due to customers                       18           0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0            18
Other short term borrowings            2,676         639       114          536               2        67          0         0          0         4,034
Long-term debt                             0       1,838    31,616       10,889           1,452     3,637     17,832    48,166     29,054       144,485
   Debt securities - senior                0       1,772     3,287        2,934           1,344     2,849     12,901    34,760     21,780        81,629
   Debt securities - subordi-
   nated                                     0        0         14            0              0          0      1,231     4,879      2,479         8,603
   Other long-term debt - senior             0       66     28,315        7,955             93        788      3,597     8,397      4,749        53,960
   Other long-term debt -
   subordinated                           0            0         0            0          15             0        103       130         46           293
Trust Preferred Securities                0            0         0          264           0           264          0         0          0           528
Other financial liabilities          78,320        1,358     1,988          329         171           284        762     1,235      1,828        86,274
Total financial liabilities         828,483       49,996   133,803       62,580      26,576        16,912     24,169    58,245     41,401      1,242,165
Other liabilities                    13,797            0         0            0           0             0          0         0          0        13,797
Total equity                              0            0         0            0           0             0          0         0     68,030        68,030
Total liabilities and equity        842,280       49,996   133,803       62,580      26,576        16,912     24,169    58,245    109,432      1,323,993
Off-balance sheet commitments
given                                42,737       11,379    13,969       15,500           8,712    24,010     32,770    99,808     37,641       286,525
   Banks                              1,243        1,538     2,018        1,765           1,502     2,555      2,180     3,167      4,592        20,560
   Retail                            16,057          783       683          163             165     2,058        257       822     10,258        31,244
   Corporates and other
   customers                         25,437        9,058    11,267       13,573           7,045    19,397     30,334    95,819     22,790       234,720




                                                                                                                                                     169
Deutsche Bank                                              Risk and capital performance
Annual Report 2021                                         Liquidity Risk Exposure




                                                                                                                                             Dec 31, 2020
                                           On
                                     demand                    Over        Over         Over          Over       Over      Over
                                         (incl.             1 month    3 months     6 months      9 months     1 year   2 years
                                        Over-                  to no      but no       but no        but no    but no    but no
                                    night and      Up to       more        more         more          more      more      more
                                     one day         one        than        than         than          than      than      than       Over
in € m.                                notice)     month   3 months    6 months     9 months         1 year   2 years   5 years    5 years          Total
Deposits                            375,436       20,323    85,104       47,290      10,005         6,510      5,362     8,053      9,948       568,031
   Due to banks                      34,818        1,364     7,860        7,969       5,353         1,354      2,961     5,853      7,901        75,432
   Due to customers                 340,618       18,959    77,244       39,322       4,653         5,156      2,401     2,199      2,047       492,599
      Retail                        151,438        3,660    57,516       28,093         992           714        605       490        150       243,656
      Corporates and other
      customers                     189,180       15,300    19,728       11,229           3,661     4,442      1,796     1,709      1,898       248,943
Trading liabilities                 372,090            0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0       372,090
   Trading securities                43,882            0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0        43,882
   Other trading liabilities            434            0         0            0               0         0          0         0          0           434
   Negative market values from
   derivative financial
   instruments                      327,775           0           0            0             0           0         0         0          0       327,775
Financial liabilities designed at
fair value through profit or loss    12,658       18,594     9,961        2,101             86          26      347      1,494      1,316        46,582
   Securities sold under
   repurchase agreements             11,258       18,511     9,780        2,065              0           1       11         10          0        41,636
   Long-term debt                        84           36       164           34             24          25      317      1,450      1,240         3,374
   Other financial liabilities
   designated at fair value
   through profit or loss              1,316         47          17            1            62          0         18        34         77          1,572
Investment contract liabilities            0          0           0            0             0        526          0         0          0            526
Negative market values from
derivative financial instruments
qualifying for hedge accounting              0      108        245           46             11           9        65      254        541           1,279
Central bank funds purchased                 0        0          0            0              0           0         0        0          0               0
Securities sold under
repurchase agreements                  1,815          14         1            0           0             0          9       485          1         2,325
   Due to banks                        1,814          13         0            0           0             0          9       409          0         2,246
   Due to customers                        1           0         1            0           0             0          0        76          1            79
Securities loaned                      1,697           0         0            0           0             0          0         0          0         1,698
   Due to banks                          426           0         0            0           0             0          0         0          0           427
   Due to customers                    1,271           0         0            0           0             0          0         0          0         1,271
Other short term borrowings            1,385         282       366          647         400           474          0         0          0         3,553
Long-term debt                             0       4,307     5,579       13,873      25,273        10,595     13,751    47,489     28,297       149,163
   Debt securities - senior                0       4,143     5,229        3,643       5,093         7,356     12,462    35,199     20,266        93,391
   Debt securities - subordi-
   nated                                     0        0         14            4           0             0          0     3,948      3,386         7,352
   Other long-term debt - senior             0      164        335       10,202      20,180         3,239      1,274     8,156      4,552        48,103
   Other long-term debt -
   subordinated                           0            0         0           24           0             0         15       185         93           316
Trust Preferred Securities                0            0         0          524         269           528          0         0          0         1,321
Other financial liabilities          86,658          942     1,735          272         188           230        875     1,211      1,784        93,894
Total financial liabilities         851,738       44,569   102,991       64,753      36,232        18,898     20,410    58,985     41,888      1,240,463
Other liabilities                    22,599            0         0            0           0             0          0         0          0        22,599
Total equity                              0            0         0            0           0             0          0         0     62,196        62,196
Total liabilities and equity        874,337       44,569   102,991       64,753      36,232        18,898     20,410    58,985    104,084      1,325,259
Off-balance sheet commitments
given                                41,744        8,996    11,000       18,109           8,285    21,379     36,149    84,924     33,269       263,854
   Banks                                576        1,356     1,268        2,137           1,453     1,532      2,008     2,401      2,704        15,437
   Retail                            16,654          802       950          333             225     1,529        349       468     10,262        31,570
   Corporates and other
   customers                         24,514        6,838     8,783       15,639           6,607    18,318     33,792    82,054     20,303       216,847




                                                                                                                                                     170
Deutsche Bank                                     Sustainability
Annual Report 2021




Sustainability
As a global financing house, we have an important role to play to support the transformation towards a world that is
environmentally sound, socially inclusive, and better governed. Consequently, sustainability is a central component of our
“Compete to win” strategy. In 2021, we made progress in implementing our sustainability strategy, focusing on four
dimensions: Sustainable Finance, Policies and Commitments, People and Operations as well as Thought Leadership and
Stakeholder Engagement. One of the main drivers for this progress is the bank’s governance to manage, measure and control
its sustainability activities. This governance includes the Group Sustainability Committee and the Sustainability Council, two
fora devoted entirely to sustainability. The bank’s central sustainability team, Group Sustainability, drives the implementation
of our sustainability strategy. To live up to the importance of sustainability we have started to grow the team in 2021. More over,
ESG specialists are growing in number across our businesses. These experts collaborate across organizational boundaries
in work streams covering a wide array of topics, from business strategy and risk management to our approach to ESG data.
All these work streams have measurable targets and detailed implementation plans. Their progress is reported to the Group
Sustainability Committee on a regular basis. The degree to which ESG targets are met is among the criteria used to calculate
our top executives’ performance-based compensation. New ESG targets were added in 2021, including the amount of
sustainable financing and investments, a reduction in our buildings’ electricity consumption, and a composite sustainability
rating consisting of the scores given to the bank by the following rating agencies: CDP, ISS ESG, MSCI ESG Ratings, S&P
Global, and Sustainalytics.


Sustainable Finance
In May 2020, we announced our target of € 200 billion in sustainable financing and investment by 2025. The ESG assets
managed by our Asset Management are not included in this figure. Given the progress we have been making, we first decided
to bring this target forward by two years to the end of 2023 and now expect to achieve it by year-end 2022. To support the
decision-making of those conducting transactions and performing validation under the bank’s Sustainable Finance Framework,
we established a Sustainable Finance Definition & Product Governance Forum in 2021. The forum recommends the
Sustainable Finance Framework’s definitions and product classification and is part of our overall sustainability governance.
Sustainable Finance highlights included:

– Finishing 2021 as the fifth most prominent arranger of ESG debt (Dealogic, by fees), up from eighth position in 2020.
  Highlight transactions included a £ 10 billion green bond for the UK and the inaugural € 12 billion green bond for the
  European Union. For both transactions Deutsche Bank acted as joint bookrunner.
– Executing our first green repurchase agreement, raising £ 20 million and our first ESG-linked repurchase agreement
  transaction globally with Turkey’s Akbank. The US$ 300 million transaction was the first time ESG, and sustainability targets
  have been attached to interbank financing in repo format in Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East, and Africa.
– Placing two green bonds in Formosa format, each raising US$ 200 million.
– Launching green deposits for our corporate clients in the form of term deposits.
– Signing an agreement at COP26 to invest in de-carbonization solutions for Sub-Saharan Africa alongside the Green
  Climate Fund.
– Rolling out an ESG advisory concept to 143 Deutsche Bank branches, exceeding our 2021 ambition.


Policies and Commitments

In 2021, we continued to develop and implement a comprehensive Climate Risk Framework, in line with the recommendations
of the Task Force for Climate-Related Financial Disclosures. The framework will enable that we understand, manage, and
safeguard the bank against potential negative impacts from climate change. In April 2021, we became a founding member of
the Net Zero Banking Alliance, committing to align our operational and attributable emissions from our loan portfolio with
pathways to net zero by 2050. This supplements the bank’s signing of the Collective Commitment to Climate Action of the
German financial sector in 2020 and our commitment to publish the carbon footprint of our loan portfolio by the end of 2022.
Next to our engagement in the Net-Zero Banking Alliance we started transition dialogues to support our clients in accelerating
their sustainability transition and develop credible transition plans. Other examples of our activities in 2021 included:

–   Joining the Forest Investor Club as founding member at COP26 during the World Leaders Summit’s Forest Day.
–   Becoming the first bank to join the Ocean Risk and Resilience Action Alliance as full member.
–   Joining the World Economic Forum’s Alliance of CEO Climate Leaders.
–   Signing supporting membership of the ESG book with Arabesque S-Ray.




                                                                                                                              171
Deutsche Bank                                   Sustainability
Annual Report 2021




People and Operations

In 2021, we remained carbon neutral for our own operations and business travel, as we have been since 2012. We further
implemented our commitment to source 100 % renewable electricity by 2025. We also launched our revised Supplier Code of
Conduct, setting out clear ethical and professional expectations in accordance with internationally recognized standards. From
2022 onwards, the prerequisite for every new or prolonged contract worth more than € 500,000 a year will be that the vendor
has an external sustainability rating from EcoVadis or other rating agencies. Compliance to the Code will help to multiply ou r
sustainability impact beyond the bank’s boundaries.”


Thought Leadership and Stakeholder Engagement

In 2021, a Deutsche Bank delegation attended a United Nations Climate Change Conference for the first time. Our
sustainability experts engaged with clients and other stakeholders on sustainability issues at COP 26, which was held in
Glasgow, Scotland. The bank hosted several events alongside academics, policy makers and clients on topics as wide-ranging
as protecting our oceans and managing the transition to a low carbon economy and the role green financing can play. Other
examples of our activities in 2021 included:

– Establishing an ESG Centre of Excellence in cooperation with the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
– Funding a chair for Sustainable Finance in the newly created Sustainable Business Transformation Initiative at the
  European School of Management and Technology Berlin.
– Launching the Deutsche Bank Ocean Resilience Philanthropy Fund, a new global philanthropic fund dedicated to ocean
  conservation and coastal resilience.

With our holistic sustainability approach, we aim to maximize our contribution to the Paris Climate Agreement and the United
Nations' Sustainable Development Goals. Several ESG rating provider have recognized the progress we made in 2021: CDP
has raised the bank’s climate change score from C to B; S&P Global scored Deutsche Bank 60 points (S&P Global CSA
assessment), putting us back in the Dow Jones Sustainability Europe Index, and our Sustainalytics score improved from 30.0
(high risk) to 27.4 (medium risk).

More information on sustainability is published in our Non-Financial Report 2021. It includes Deutsche Bank’s Non-Financial
Statement in accordance with § 315 (3) of the German Commercial Code. A PDF of the Non-Financial Report is published on
our Investor Relations website: db.com/annual-report.




                                                                                                                          172
Deutsche Bank                                                     Employees
Annual Report 2021                                                Group Headcount




Employees

Group Headcount
As of December 31, 2021, we employed a total of 82,969 staff members compared to 84,659 as of December 31, 2020.
We calculate our employee figures on a full-time equivalent basis, meaning we include proportionate numbers of part-time
employees.

The following table shows our numbers of full-time equivalent employees as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.

Employees1                                                                           Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020    Dec 31, 2019
Germany                                                                                   35,741          37,315          40,491
Europe (outside Germany), Middle East and Africa                                          19,311          19,617          19,672
Asia/Pacific                                                                              20,215          19,430          18,874
North America2                                                                             7,556           8,149           8,399
Latin America                                                                                145             148             162
Total employees                                                                           82,969          84,659          87,597
1
    Full-time equivalent employees, numbers may not add up due to rounding.
2
    Primarily the United States.


The number of our employees decreased in 2021 by 1,690 or 2.0 % driven by execution of transformation initiatives announced
in July 2019.

– Germany (-1,574; -4.2 %) driven by the implementation of restructuring measures, primarily in Private Bank and
  infrastructure functions;
– North America (-592; -7.3 %) driven by reductions in all divisions and related infrastructure functions;
– Latin America (-3; -2.0 %) due to reductions primarily in Brazil as a result of the implementation of our footprint strategy;
– EMEA ex Germany (-306; -1.6 %) mainly driven by reductions in the Private Bank and in the Corporate Bank partly offset
  by increases in Technology Data & Innovation;
– Asia/Pacific (+785; +4.0 %) primarily driven by increases in Technology Data & Innovation.

The following table shows the distribution of full-time equivalent employees by division as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and
2019.

Employees                                                                           Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020    Dec 31, 2019
Corporate Bank (CB)                                                                     16.0 %          15.7 %          15.4 %
Investment Bank (IB)                                                                     8.7 %           9.0 %           8.5 %
Private Bank (PB)                                                                       33.9 %          35.2 %          35.9 %
Asset Management (AM)                                                                    4.9 %           4.6 %           4.5 %
Capital Release Unit (CRU)                                                               0.3 %           0.6 %           0.7 %
Infrastructure                                                                          36.2 %          34.9 %          35.0 %


– Corporate Bank (CB, -55; -0.4 %) mainly driven by reductions the Americas and UK, partly offset by increases mainly in
  APAC;
– Investment Bank (IB, -382; -5.0 %) mainly reductions in operations functions;
– Private Bank (PB, -1,665; -5.6 %) mainly driven by the reductions in Germany and in EMEA ex Germany;
– Asset Management (AM, +146; +3.7 %) primarily driven by increases in Germany, UK and in Asia/Pacific;
– Capital Release Unit (CRU, -211; -44.2 %) mainly driven by reductions related to the sale of Global Prime Finance and
  Electronic Equities platform;
– Infrastructure functions (+477; +1.6 %) primarily driven by increases in Technology Data & Innovation (+1,040) mainly
  driven by insourcing of business critical external roles, partly offset by reductions in all other infrastructure functions.




                                                                                                                              173
Deutsche Bank                                 Employees
Annual Report 2021                            Post-Employment Benefit Plans




Post-Employment Benefit Plans
We sponsor a number of post-employment benefit plans on behalf of our employees, both defined contribution plans and
defined benefit plans.

In our globally coordinated accounting process covering defined benefit plans with a defined benefit obligation exc eeding
€ 2 million our global actuary reviews the valuations provided by locally appointed actuaries in each country.

By applying our global principles for determining the financial and demographic assumptions we ensure that the assumptions
are best-estimate, unbiased and mutually compatible, and that they are globally consistent.

For a further discussion on our employee benefit plans see Note 33 “Employee Benefits” to our consolidated financial
statements.




                                                                                                                      174
Deutsche Bank                                    Employees
Annual Report 2021                               Diversity and Inclusion




Restructuring
As of December 31, 2021, Deutsche Bank had reduced the number of employees by 1,690 (2.0 %) to 82,969. The COVID-19
pandemic affected our reduction target in 2021. Deutsche Bank continued to improve efficiency and infrastructure in 2021 and
plans a further reduction of positions by the end of 2022.

Reductions primarily in Germany mainly driven by Private Bank (-1,529).



Talent acquisition
Voluntary staff turnover rates declined in 2020 mainly driven by COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021 voluntary staff turnover rates
returned almost back to pre-COVID-19 level: the voluntary staff turnover rate was at 7.9 % (2020: 5.9 %, 2019: 8.0 %). The
increase of 2.0 percentage points versus prior year is mainly driven by a higher staff turnover rate in Asia/Pacific (2021:
14.6 %, 2020: 11.3 %), Americas (2021: 17.0 %, 2020: 10.1 %) and in EMEA excluding Germany (2021: 7.9 %, 2020: 5.6 %),
while voluntary staff turnover rate in Germany decreased (2021: 2.2 %, 2020: 2.6 %).

Even amid the above-mentioned restructuring measures, recruiting talent remains a key priority for us. In 2021 the main focus
was on filling the front office roles in growth areas (such as International Private Bank and Asset Management). In addition,
focus was on replacing operation-centre employees who left voluntarily, and hiring talent to meet the growing demand in
regulatory roles (such as Client Lifecycle Management and Anti-Financial Crime).

We remain committed to our strategic priority of hiring university graduates, as they help propel our change agenda. We hired
890 university graduates in 2021 (2020: 717). The bank also insourced 1,697 external roles (2020: 1,498), particularly in IT.



Promoting internal career mobility
Internal mobility plays a vital role in developing and retaining qualified, talented employees and ensuring that the bank
continues to benefit from their expertise and experience. We foster mobility between divisions, which enables employees to
broaden their skills and experience. Moreover, internal mobility helps reduce the bank’s redundancy and recruitment costs.

In 2021, Deutsche Bank continued to implement its internal mobility strategy and live up to its commitment to filling one-third
of all vacant positions with suitable candidates from within the organization. Vacant positions (except for managing directors)
are typically first advertised inside the group for at least two weeks. Prioritizing internal candidates helps employees affected
by restructuring find new roles in the bank.

In 2021, 31.0 % (2020: 35.9 %) of all job vacancies were filled internally (excluding Postbank). On average, it took 81 days to
fill vacant positions (2020: 74 days).



Diversity and Inclusion
Diversity is integral to the bank’s corporate culture. We aim to attract, develop, and retain talented employees from all cultures,
countries, races, ethnicities, genders, sexual orientations, disabilities, beliefs, backgrounds, and experiences. We want all our
employees to feel welcomed, accepted, respected, and supported. We expect our leaders to build inclusive teams of people
with different skills, styles, and approaches who are empowered to contribute their best work and are encouraged to speak
up.

Throughout 2021 we continued to embed diversity and inclusion in our culture and employee practices by supporting the
advancement of women and members of other under-represented groups. The steps we take include targeted outreach to
attract and hire, enhanced career planning, leadership development, exposure opportunities, and senior leader sponsorship.
We continue to equip our people with resources to practice inclusion and interrupt unconscious bias in people-related
decisions.

At year-end 2021, six or 30 % of Supervisory Board members were women (2020: 30 %). This met the statutory requirement
of 30 % for publicly listed and codetermined German companies pursuant to gender quota legislation that took effect in 2015.




                                                                                                                              175
Deutsche Bank                                                           Employees
Annual Report 2021                                                      Key employee figures




The Supervisory Board’s goal, set in 2017, is to have at least 20 % women on the Management Board by June 30, 2022. Two
women would be required to achieve this goal on a Management Board with between eight and twelve members. With the
appointment of Rebecca Short responsible for the Bank’s transformation in May 2021 this 2022 goal was met as of year-end
2021. Because with her and Christiana Riley - responsible for the American business of the bank - two women are represented
on the Management Board.

While we have improved, we have fallen short of the wider gender diversity goals we set in 2019. As a result, we will strengthen
our efforts to drive gender diversity in our bank and work towards refreshed goals: As a part of our 35 by 25 commitment, we
want women to represent at least 35 % of our Managing Director, Director and Vice President population by 2025 (excluding
DWS). We also plan to have at least 30 % women in the positions one and two levels below the Management Board (excluding
DWS).

The bank is committed to increasing the proportion of women in senior leadership positions across the organization, but it is
our individual businesses that deliver on this commitment. Since cultures and social challenges vary by country and type of
business, each of our regions and business has its own diversity and inclusion efforts. However, the Management Board
remains committed to these targets, and the bank has put in targeted initiatives to accelerate change. These initiatives have
been implemented across the entire employee life cycle, from attracting and hiring talent to developing, retaining, and
promoting it.



Key employee figures
A few selected employee figures and KPIs are set forth below. For full details on Deutsche Bank’s people metrics, as well as
its strategic HR priorities and achievements, please refer to the bank’s Human Resources Report 2021.

                                                                                                                             Dec 31, 2021            Dec 31, 2020   Dec 31, 2019
Female staff (in %, Headcount)1
  Female Managing Directors                                                                                                        19.3 %                18.4 %         18.3 %
  Female Directors                                                                                                                 25.7 %                25.1 %         25.1 %
  Female Vice Presidents                                                                                                           32.8 %                32.4 %         31.4 %
  Female Assistant Vice Presidents & Associates                                                                                    41.3 %                40.6 %         40.6 %
  Female Non Officers                                                                                                              60.4 %                59.9 %         59.6 %
Total female staff                                                                                                                 46.6 %                46.4 %         46.3 %
Age (in %, headcount)2
  up to 29 years                                                                                                                   14.7 %                14.9 %         15.1 %
  30 - 39 years                                                                                                                    28.1 %                28.4 %         28.6 %
  40 - 49 years                                                                                                                    27.1 %                27.1 %         27.1 %
  50 - 59 years                                                                                                                    25.7 %                25.2 %         25.0 %
  over 59 years                                                                                                                     4.5 %                 4.4 %          4.2 %
Part-time employment (in % of total staff)
  Germany                                                                                                                          26.8 %                27.2 %         24.1 %
  Europe (outside Germany), Middle East and Africa                                                                                  5.6 %                 5.8 %          6.1 %
  Americas                                                                                                                          0.3 %                 0.2 %          0.3 %
  Asia/Pacific                                                                                                                      0.2 %                 0.1 %          0.2 %
Total part-time employment                                                                                                         13.8 %                14.3 %         13.3 %
Apprentices ratio in Germany                                                                                                        4.1 %                 4.2 %          3.6 %

                                                                                                                                      2021                  2020           2019
Commitment index                                                                                                                     71 %                  69 %           58 %
Enablement index                                                                                                                     73 %                  76 %           66 %
Voluntary staff turnover rate
  Germany                                                                                                                           2.2 %                 2.6 %          2.5 %
  Europe (outside Germany), Middle East and Africa                                                                                  7.9 %                 5.6 %          7.7 %
  Americas                                                                                                                         17.0 %                10.1 %         14.4 %
  Asia/Pacific                                                                                                                     14.6 %                11.3 %         17.0 %
Total voluntary staff turnover rate                                                                                                 7.9 %                 5.9 %          8.0 %
Health rate (in %)³                                                                                                                93.1 %                92.7 %         92.2 %
1
    Declared corporate titles of Postbank (incl. subsidiaries) are only alternative, technically derived, and not contractually defined or agreed.
2
    Numbers may not add up due to rounding.
3
    Health rate: 100 - ((total sickness days x 100)/total regular working days).




                                                                                                                                                                            176
Deutsche Bank                                     Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Annual Report 2021                                Risks in Financial Reporting




Internal Control over Financial Reporting

General
Management of Deutsche Bank and its consolidated subsidiaries is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
Internal Control over Financial Reporting (ICOFR). Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed under
the supervision of our Chairman of the Supervisory Board and our Chief Financial Officer to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting. In addition to the preparation of the company’s consolidated financial statements
for external reporting purposes in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and endorsed by the European Union (EU). Our Internal control over
financial reporting includes our disclosure controls and procedures designed to prevent misstatements.



Risks in Financial Reporting
The primary risks in financial reporting are that either financial statements do not present a true and fair view due to inadvertent
or intentional errors (fraud) or the publication of financial statements is not performed on a timely basis. These risks may
reduce investor confidence or cause reputational damage and may have legal consequences including banking regulatory
interventions. A lack of fair presentation arises when one or more financial statement amounts, or disclosures contain
misstatements (or omissions) that are material. Misstatements are deemed material if they could, individually or in aggregate,
influence economic decisions that users make because of the financial statements.

To confine those risks of financial reporting, management of the Group has established internal control over financial reporting
with the aim of providing reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatements. In addition, an assessment
was conducted of the effectiveness of the Group’s internal control over financial reporting. This was based on the Internal
Control Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO). COSO recommends the establishment of specific objectives to facilitate the design and evaluate adequacy of a
control system. As a result, in establishing internal control over financial reporting, management has adopted the following
financial statement objectives:

–   Existence - assets and liabilities exist and transactions have occurred;
–   Completeness - all transactions are recorded and account balances are included in the financial statements;
–   Valuation - assets, liabilities and transactions are recorded in the financial statements at the appropriate amounts;
–   Rights, Obligations and Ownership – rights, obligations and ownership are appropriately recorded as assets and liabilities;
–   Presentation and Disclosures - classification, disclosure and presentation of financial reporting is appropriate;
–   Safeguarding of assets - unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of assets is prevented or detected in a timely manner.

However, any internal control system, including internal control over financial reporting, no matter how well conceived and
operated, can provide only reasonable, but not absolute assurance that the objectives of that control system are met. As such,
disclosure controls and procedures or systems for internal control over financial reporting may not prevent all errors;
inadvertent or intentional errors (fraud). Furthermore, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods, are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with policies or procedures may deteriorate over time. In addition, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that
there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs.


Controls to Minimize the Risk of Financial Reporting Misstatement
The system of internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:

– Pertain to the maintenance of records, that, in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
  dispositions of the company’s assets;
– Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
  accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are made
  only in accordance with authorizations of the company’s management and;
– Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of
  the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.




                                                                                                                               177
Deutsche Bank                                   Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Annual Report 2021                              Risks in Financial Reporting




Measuring Effectiveness of Internal Control
Each year, management of the Group undertakes a formal evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the system of
internal control over financial reporting. This evaluation incorporates an assessment of the effectiveness of the control
environment as well as individual controls which make up the system of internal control over financial reporting and considers:

– The financial misstatement risk of the financial statement line items, considering such factors as materiality and the
  susceptibility of the financial statement item to misstatement; and,
– The susceptibility of identified controls to failure, considering such factors as the degree of automation, complexity, and
  risk of management override, competence of personnel and the level of judgment required.

These factors determine in their entirety the type and scope of the evidence required by § 315 HGB, which the management
needs to assess whether or not the established internal control over financial reporting is effective. The evidence itse lf is
generated from procedures integrated within the daily responsibilities of staff or from procedures implemented specifically for
purposes of the internal control over financial reporting evaluation. Information from other sources also form an important
component of the evaluation since such evidence may either bring additional control issues to the attention of management
or may corroborate findings. Such information sources may include:

– Reports on audits carried out by or on behalf of regulatory authorities;
– External Auditor reports; and,
– Reports commissioned to evaluate the effectiveness of outsourced processes to third parties.

In addition, Group Audit evaluates the design and operating effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting by
performing periodic and ad-hoc risk-based audits. Reports are produced summarizing the results from each audit which are
distributed to the responsible managers for the activities concerned. These reports also provide evidence to support the annual
evaluation by management of the overall operating effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting.

As a result of the evaluation, management has concluded that internal control over financial reporting is appropriately designed
and operating effectively as of December 31, 2021.




                                                                                                                           178
Deutsche Bank                                   Information pursuant to Section 315a (1) of the German Commercial Code and Explanatory Report
Annual Report 2021                              System of Control of any Employee Share Scheme where the Control Rights are not Exercised Directly
                                                by the Employees




Information pursuant to Section 315a (1) of the
German Commercial Code and Explanatory Report

Structure of the Share Capital including Authorized and
Conditional Capital
For information regarding Deutsche Bank’s share capital please refer to Note 32 “Common Shares” to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.



Restrictions on Voting Rights or the Transfer of Shares
Under Section 136 of the German Stock Corporation Act the voting right of the affected shares is excluded by law. As far as
the bank or its subsidiaries held own shares during the year of 2021 in its portfolio according to Section 71b of the German
Stock Corporation Act no rights could be exercised. We are not aware of any other restrictions on voting rights or the transfer
of shares.



Shareholdings which Exceed 10 of the Voting Rights                %



The German Securities Trading Act (Wertpapierhandelsgesetz) requires that any investor whose share of voting rights
reaches, exceeds or falls below certain thresholds as the result of purchases, disposals or otherwise, must notify us and the
German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) thereof. The lowest threshold is 3 %. We are not aware of any
shareholder holding directly or indirectly 10 % or more of the voting rights.



Shares with Special Control Rights
Shares which confer special control rights have not been issued.



System of Control of any Employee Share Scheme where the
Control Rights are not Exercised Directly by the Employees
The employees, who hold Deutsche Bank shares, exercise their control rights as other shareholders in accordance with
applicable law and the Articles of Association (Satzung).




                                                                                                                                             179
Deutsche Bank                                    Information pursuant to Section 315a (1) of the German Commercial Code and Explanatory Report
Annual Report 2021                               Rules Governing the Amendment of the Articles of Association




Rules Governing the Appointment and Replacement of
Members of the Management Board
Pursuant to the German Stock Corporation Act (Section 84) and the Articles of Association of Deutsche Bank (Section 6) the
members of the Management Board are appointed by the Supervisory Board. The number of Management Board members
is determined by the Supervisory Board. According to the Articles of Association, the Management Board has at least three
members. The Supervisory Board may appoint one or two members of the Management Board as Chairpersons of the
Management Board. Members of the Management Board may be appointed for a maximum term of up to five years. They
may be reappointed or have their term extended for one or more terms of up to a maximum of five years each. The German
Co-Determination Act (Mitbestimmungsgesetz; Section 31) requires a majority of at least two thirds of the members of the
Supervisory Board to appoint members of the Management Board. If such majority is not achieved, the Mediation Committee
shall give, within one month, a recommendation for the appointment to the Management Board. The Supervisory Board will
then appoint the members of the Management Board with the majority of its members. If such appointment fails, the
Chairperson of the Supervisory Board shall have two votes in a new vote. If a required member of the Management Board
has not been appointed, the Local Court (Amtsgericht) in Frankfurt am Main shall, in urgent cases, make the necessary
appointments upon motion by any party concerned (Section 85 of the Stock Corporation Act).

Pursuant to the German Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz) and Regulation (EU) No 468/2014 of the European Central Bank
(SSM Framework Regulation) evidence must be provided to the European Central Bank (ECB), the German Federal Financial
Supervisory Authority (BaFin) and the Deutsche Bundesbank that the member of the Management Board has adequate
theoretical and practical experience of the businesses of the Bank as well as managerial experience before the member is
appointed (Sections 24 (1) No. 1 and 25c (1) of the Banking Act, Article 93 of the SSM Framework Regulation).

The Supervisory Board may revoke the appointment of an individual as member of the Management Board or as Chairperson
of the Management Board for good cause. Such cause includes in particular a gross breach of duties, the inability to manage
the Bank properly or a vote of no-confidence by the shareholders’ meeting (Hauptversammlung, referred to as the General
Meeting), unless such vote of no-confidence was made for obviously arbitrary reasons.

The ECB or the BaFin may appoint a special representative and transfer to such special representative the responsibility and
powers of individual members of the Management Board if such members are not trustworthy or do not have the required
competencies or if the credit institution does not have the required number of Management Board members. In any such case,
the responsibility and powers of the Management Board members concerned are suspended (Section 45c (1) through (3) of
the Banking Act, Article 93 (2) of the SSM Framework Regulation).

If the discharge of a bank’s obligations to its creditors is endangered or if there are valid concerns that effective supervision
of the bank is not possible, the BaFin may take temporary measures to avert that risk. It may also prohibit members of the
Management Board from carrying out their activities or impose limitations on such activities (Section 46 (1) of the Banking
Act). In such case, the Local Court Frankfurt am Main shall, at the request of the BaFin appoint the necessary members of
the Management Board, if, as a result of such prohibition, the Management Board no longer has the necessary number of
members in order to conduct the business (Section 46 (2) of the Banking Act).



Rules Governing the Amendment of the Articles of Association
Any amendment of the Articles of Association requires a resolution of the General Meeting (Section 179 of the Stock
Corporation Act). The authority to amend the Articles of Association in so far as such amendments merely relate to the wording,
such as changes of the share capital as a result of the issuance out of authorized capital, has been assigned to the Supervisory
Board by the Articles of Association of Deutsche Bank (Section 20 (3)). Pursuant to the Articles of Association, the resolutions
of the General Meeting are taken by a simple majority of votes and, in so far as a majority of capital stock is required, by a
simple majority of capital stock, except where law or the Articles of Association determine otherwise (Section 20 (1)).
Amendments to the Articles of Association become effective upon their entry in the Commercial Register (Section 181 (3) of
the Stock Corporation Act).




                                                                                                                                             180
Deutsche Bank                                      Information pursuant to Section 315a (1) of the German Commercial Code and Explanatory Report
Annual Report 2021                                 Powers of the Management Board to Issue or Buy Back Shares




Powers of the Management Board to Issue or Buy Back Shares
The Annual General Meeting of May 27, 2021 authorized the Management Board pursuant to Section 71 (1) No. 7 of the Stock
Corporation Act to buy and sell, for the purpose of securities trading, own shares of Deutsche Bank AG on or before April
30, 2022, at prices which do not exceed or fall short by more than 10 % of the average of the share prices (closing auction
prices of the Deutsche Bank share in Xetra trading and/or in a comparable successor system on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange)
on the respective three preceding stock exchange trading days. In this context, the shares acquired for this purpose may not,
at the end of any day, exceed 5 % of the share capital of Deutsche Bank AG.

The Annual General Meeting of May 27, 2021 authorized the Management Board pursuant to Section 71 (1) No. 8 of the Stock
Corporation Act to buy, on or before April 30, 2026, own shares of Deutsche Bank AG in a total volume of up to 10 % of the
share capital at the time the resolution was taken or – if the value is lower – of the share capital at the time this authorization
is exercised. Together with own shares acquired for trading purposes and/or for other reasons and which are from time to time
in the company’s possession or attributable to the company pursuant to Sections 71a et seq. of the Stock Corporation Act,
the own shares purchased on the basis of this authorization may not at any time exceed 10 % of the company’s respectively
applicable share capital. The own shares may be bought through the stock exchange or by means of a public purchase offer
to all shareholders. The consideration for the purchase of shares (excluding ancillary purchase costs) through the stock
exchange may not be more than 10 % higher or more than 20 % lower than the average of the share prices (closing auction
prices of the Deutsche Bank share in Xetra trading and/or in a comparable successor system on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange)
on the last three stock exchange trading days before the obligation to purchase. In the case of a public purchase offer, it may
not be more than 10 % higher or more than 20 % lower than the average of the share prices (closing auction prices of the
Deutsche Bank share in Xetra trading and/or in a comparable successor system on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange) on the last
three stock exchange trading days before the day of publication of the offer. If the volume of shares offered in a public purchase
offer exceeds the planned buyback volume, acceptance must be in proportion to the shares offered in each case. The preferred
acceptance of small quantities of up to 50 of the company’s shares offered for purchase per shareholder may be defined.

The Management Board has also been authorized to dispose of the purchased shares and of any shares purchased on the
basis of previous authorizations pursuant to Section 71 (1) No. 8 of the Stock Corporation Act on the stock exchange or by an
offer to all shareholders. The Management Board has been authorized to dispose of the purchased shares against
contribution-in kind and with the exclusion of shareholders’ pre-emptive rights for the purpose of acquiring companies or
shareholdings in companies or other assets that serve the company’s business operations. In addition, the Management Board
has been authorized, in case it disposes of such own shares by offer to all shareholders, to grant to the holders of the option
rights, convertible bonds and convertible participatory rights issued by the company and its affiliated companies pre-emptive
rights to the shares to the extent that they would be entitled to such rights if they exercised their option and/or conversion
rights. Shareholders’ pre-emptive rights are excluded for these cases and to this extent.

The Management Board has also been authorized to use shares purchased on the basis of authorizations pursuant to § 71
(1) No. 8 Stock Corporation Act to issue staff shares, with the exclusion of shareholders’ pre-emptive rights, to employees and
retired employees of the company and its affiliated companies or to use them to service option rights on shares of the company
and/or rights or duties to purchase shares of the company granted to employees or members of executive or non-executive
management bodies of the company and of affiliated companies.

Furthermore, the Management Board has been authorized, with the exclusion of shareholders’ pre-emptive rights, to sell such
own shares to third parties against cash payment if the purchase price is not substantially lower than the price of the shares
on the stock exchange at the time of sale. Use may only be made of this authorization if it has been ensured that the number
of shares sold on the basis of this authorization does not exceed 10 % of the company’s share capital at the time this
authorization becomes effective or – if the amount is lower – at the time this authorization is exercised. Shares that are issued
or sold during the validity of this authorization with the exclusion of pre-emptive rights, in direct or analogous application of
Section 186 (3) sentence 4 Stock Corporation Act, are to be included in the maximum limit of 10 % of the share capital. Also
to be included are shares that are to be issued to service option and/or conversion rights from convertible bonds, bonds with
warrants, convertible participatory rights or participatory rights, if these bond or participatory rights are issued during the validity
of this authorization with the exclusion of pre-emptive rights in corresponding application of Section 186 (3) sentence 4 Stock
Corporation Act.

The Management Board has also been authorized to cancel shares acquired on the basis of this or a preceding authorization
without the execution of this cancellation process requiring a further resolution by the General Meeting.




                                                                                                                                               181
Deutsche Bank                                     Corporate Governance Statement pursuant to Sections 289f and 315d of the German Commercial
                                                  Code
Annual Report 2021                                Agreements for Compensation in Case of a Takeover Bid




The Annual General Meeting of May 27, 2021 authorized the Management Board pursuant to Section 71 (1) No. 8 of the Stock
Corporation Act to execute the purchase of shares under the resolved authorization also with the use of put and call options
or forward purchase contracts. The company may accordingly sell to third parties put options based on physical delivery and
buy call options from third parties if it is ensured by the option conditions that these options are fulfilled only with shares which
themselves were acquired subject to compliance with the principle of equal treatment. All share purchases based on put or
call options are limited to shares in a maximum volume of 5 % of the actual share capital at the time of the resolution by the
General Meeting on this authorization. The term of the options must be selected such that the share purchase upon exercising
the option is carried out at the latest on April 30, 2026.

The purchase price to be paid for the shares upon exercise of the put options or upon the maturity of the forward purchase
may not exceed more than 10 % or fall below 10 % of the average of the share prices (closing auction prices of the Deutsche
Bank share in Xetra trading and/or in a comparable successor system on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange) on the last three
stock exchange trading days before conclusion of the respective transaction in each case excluding ancillary purchase costs
but taking into account the option premium received. The call options may only be exercised if the purchase price to be paid
does not exceed by more than 10 % or fall below 10 % of the average of the share prices (closing auction prices of the
Deutsche Bank share in Xetra trading and/or in a comparable successor system on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange) on the last
three stock exchange trading days before the acquisition of the shares.

To the sale and cancellation of shares acquired with the use of derivatives the general rules established by the General
Meeting apply.

Own shares may continue to be purchased using existing derivatives that were agreed on the basis and during the existence
of previous authorizations.



Significant Agreements which Take Effect, Alter or Terminate
upon a Change of Control of the Company Following a Takeover
Bid
Significant agreements which take effect, alter or terminate upon a change of control of the company following a takeover bid
have not been entered into.



Agreements for Compensation in Case of a Takeover Bid
If a member of the Management Board leaves the bank within the scope of a change of control, she or he receives a one-off
compensation payment described in greater detail in the Compensation Report.


Corporate Governance Statement pursuant to
Sections 289f and 315d of the German Commercial
Code
The entire Corporate Governance Statement according to sections 289f and 315d of the German Commercial Code is
available on our website under https://www.db.com/ir/en/reports.htm as well as in the chapter “3 – Corporate Governance
Statement according to Sections 289f, 315d of the German Commercial Code / Corporate Governance Report”.




                                                                                                                                               182
Deutsche Bank                                    Standalone parent company information (HGB)
Annual Report 2021                               Deutsche Bank AG Performance




Standalone parent company information (HGB)

Introduction
Deutsche Bank AG (DB AG) is the parent company of Deutsche Bank Group and is its most material component. The
management of Deutsche Bank Group is based on IFRS results of our corporate divisions. Deutsche Bank AG is fully
integrated in the initiatives and target setting of Deutsche Bank Group. The performance of the Group is ultimately driving the
performance of Deutsche Bank AG. Further, the bank has utilized the option under Section 2a of the German Banking Act
(KWG) with respect to regulatory capital so that regulatory capital ratios are only applicable on Group level.

Therefore, information that has been provided regarding Deutsche Bank Group in this combined management report in general
also is relevant and applies to Deutsche Bank AG. Additional information that facilitates an understanding of Deutsche Bank
AG, is contained in this section. The financial information in this section has been prepared in accordance with the German
Commercial Code (“Handelsgesetzbuch”, HGB), unless stated otherwise. Further details on financial information prepared in
accordance with HGB can be found in the notes to the financial statements for Deutsche Bank AG in a separate report.



Deutsche Bank AG Performance
One parameter to evaluate the performance of the Group is the ability to make distributions to shareholders. This ability
depends on the availability of distributable profits of Deutsche Bank AG determined in accordance with HGB. Beyond that the
financial information of Deutsche Bank AG prepared in accordance with HGB is generally less relevant to assess or steer the
Group’s financial performance due to the circumstances set forth in the introduction above.

In 2021, Deutsche Bank AG recorded a net profit of € 1.9 billion compared to net loss of € 1.8 billion in 2020. Prior year’s loss
was largely driven by COVID-19, leading to a negative operating result and negative balances of other ordinary results. In the
current year, we experienced a recovery due to the easing of COVID-19 restrictions resulting in an overall release of credit
loss allowances. Consistent with the Group’s performance we also recorded a general increase in our business activities and
both effects were increasing our net operating profit by € 1.0 billion.

 Outside operating profit, a release from the fund for general banking risks by € 2.2 billion overcompensated for the reduction
in the extraordinary result by € 924 million. This reduction was mainly caused by the absence of last year's gain from the
merger between DB AG and DB PFK AG. Finally, a tax benefit of € 400 million compared to a tax expense of € 894 million in
the previous year contributed to the net income of € 1.9 billion.

The Management Board and the Supervisory Board will propose to the Annual General Meeting to pay a dividend of € 0.20 per
share and to carry forward the remaining distributable profit.




                                                                                                                            183
Deutsche Bank                                                           Standalone parent company information (HGB)
Annual Report 2021                                                      Deutsche Bank AG Performance




Income Statement
Condensed income statement
                                                                                                                                                                 Change
in € m.                                                                                                          2021                   2020           in € m.     in %
Interest income1                                                                                              12,959                  15,079           (2,119)      (14)
Current income2                                                                                                1,443                   1,254              188        15
Total interest income                                                                                         14,402                  16,333           (1,931)      (12)
Interest expenses                                                                                              5,369                   7,808           (2,439)      (31)
Net interest income                                                                                            9,033                   8,525              508         6
Commission income                                                                                              9,052                   7,841            1,210        15
Commission expenses                                                                                            2,240                   2,487             (247)      (10)
Net commission income                                                                                          6,811                   5,354            1,457        27
Net trading result                                                                                             1,266                   1,328              (62)       (5)
   thereof release of trading-related special reserve
   according to Section 340e HGB                                                                                   0                       0                0      N/M
Total revenues                                                                                                17,110                  15,207            1,903        13
Wages and salaries                                                                                             4,758                   4,679               80         2
Compulsory social security contributions3                                                                      1,246                   1,294              (47)       (4)
Staff expenses                                                                                                 6,005                   5,972               32         1
Other administrative expenses4                                                                                10,419                  10,002              418         4
Administrative expenses                                                                                       16,424                  15,974              450         3
Balance of other operating income/expenses                                                                      (560)                    835           (1,396)     N/M
Risk provisioning                                                                                                  4                     971             (966)    (100)
Operating profit                                                                                                 121                    (902)           1,023      N/M
Balance of other ordinary income/expenses                                                                       (658)                   (752)              94       (12)
Extraordinary result                                                                                            (145)                    779             (924)     N/M
Releases from/(Additions) to the fund for general banking risks                                                2,200                       0            2,200      N/M
Income before taxes                                                                                            1,518                    (875)           2,393      N/M
Taxes                                                                                                           (400)                    894           (1,295)     N/M
Net income (loss)                                                                                              1,919                  (1,769)           3,688      N/M
Profit carried forward from the previous year                                                                      0                       0                0      N/M
Withdrawal from capital reserves                                                                                   0                   1,769           (1,769)     N/M
Allocations to revenue reserves                                                                                  950                       0              950      N/M
– to other revenue reserves                                                                                      950                       0              950      N/M
Distributable profit                                                                                             969                       0              969      N/M
N/M - Not meaningful
1
  From lending and money market business, fixed-income securities, and government inscribed debt.
2
  From equity shares and other variable-yield securities, participating interests, investments in affiliated companies (including profit transfer agreements).
3
  Including expenses for pensions and other employee benefits.
4
  Including depreciation on tangible and intangible assets.


Net interest income increased by € 508 million to € 9.0 billion in 2021. Current income, up by € 188 million, benefitted from
contributions from affiliated companies. Income from investments in subsidiaries increased by € 339 million, partly offset by
income from profit pooling, which decreased by € 164 million. The net interest result from lending and securities less interest
expenses increased by € 320 million, driven by deposit repricing agreements and lower funding costs, reflecting improved
credit ratings of Deutsche Bank.

Net commission income of € 6.8 billion increased by € 1.5 billion compared to the prior year, included € 525 million from
income from services rendered to group companies, € 392 million from net commission income from securities business, and
€ 362 million from net commissions from loan business.

Deutsche Bank AG reported € 1.3 billion net trading result in 2021, a decrease of € 62 million compared to prior year.

Staff expenses were almost stable at € 6.0 billion. The slight increase of € 32 million compared to 2020 was mainly driven by
higher wages and salaries.

Geographical breakdown of our staff (full-time-equivalent)
Staff (full-time equivalents)1                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020     Change
Germany                                                                                                                               21,589          22,305       (716)
Europe excl. Germany                                                                                                                   7,703           8,144       (441)
Americas                                                                                                                                 454             560       (106)
Africa/Asia/Australia                                                                                                                  5,113           5,331       (218)
Total                                                                                                                                 34,859          36,341     (1,482)
1
    Staff (full-time equivalent) = total headcount adjusted proportionately for part time staff, excluding apprentices and interns.




                                                                                                                                                                    184
Deutsche Bank                                     Standalone parent company information (HGB)
Annual Report 2021                                Deutsche Bank AG Performance




The decrease in the number of employees was primarily driven by the implementation of the strategic transformation of
Deutsche Bank. In Germany, the decrease was mainly related to Private Bank. In Europe excluding Germany the number of
employees decreased primarily in UK. The number of employees in the Americas decreased mainly driven by reductions in
Corporate Bank and Infrastructure functions. In the region Africa/Asia/Australia the reduction of the number of employees was
primarily driven by Hong Kong and Singapore.

Other administrative costs were € 10.4 billion, an increase of € 418 million. Other administrative expenses (excluding
depreciation and amortization on tangible and intangible assets) increased by € 387 million to € 9.2 billion. This development
was driven by higher costs for IT equipment, up by € 612 million, partly offset by lower general operational expenses, expenses
for premises and marketing. Scheduled depreciation and amortization of tangible and intangible assets remained almost stable
at € 1.2 billion in 2021, up by € 31 million.

The balance of other operating income/expenses was negative € 560 million in 2021 and positive € 835 million in 2020. The
total charge to profits by € 1.4 billion was driven by a decrease in the net result from financial instruments in the banking book
of € 735 million, as well as increases related to net interest expenses on staff related provisions of € 569 million and to
expenses for civil damages, penalties and fines of € 200 million.

In 2021, total net risk provisioning, consisting of changes in credit related risk provisioning and the net result from se curities
held in the liquidity reserve, was of € 4 million, an improvement of € 967 million compared to 2020. This development was
attributable to lower risk provisioning in the loan business, down by € 1.2 billion, partly offset by lower net gains from securities
held in the liquidity reserve, down by € 242 million, mainly driven by lower gains on sales. Risk provisioning in the loan business
in 2021 benefitted from a supportive credit environment, high quality loan book and continued strict risk disciplin e against a
backdrop of economic recovery due to the easing of COVID-19 restrictions during 2021, overall leading to releases of the
credit loss allowance. In addition, prior year risk provisioning increased by € 249 million due to a methodology change. This
related to changes in our calculation of the credit loss allowance on financial assets which are not credit-impaired but have an
increased probability of default.

The balance of other ordinary income and expenses was negative € 658 million (2020: negative € 752 million), consisting of
valuation adjustments of investments in affiliated companies, write-downs and non-scheduled depreciation of tangible and
intangible assets and expenses from loss take-over.

Valuation adjustments of investments in affiliated companies amounted to € 298 million (2020: € 613 million), largely relating
to one investment. Prior years’ value adjustments reflected, among other factors, the worsened economic outlook caused by
COVID-19 and the expected development of interest rates.

In addition, write-downs and non-scheduled depreciation of tangible and intangible assets amounted to € 216 million in 2021
(2020: € 38 million). Current year impairments related primarily to self-developed software.

Expenses from loss take-over, also presented within other ordinary income and expenses, amounted to € 145 million in 2021
(2020: € 100 million).

Net extraordinary income and expenses were negative € 145 million (2020: positive € 779 million). Prior year amounts
included a one-time gain of € 1.2 billion from the merger with DB PFK AG.

The bank released €2.2 billion of the fund for general banking risks according to section 340g HGB in 2021 based on the
assessment that the risk profile of the bank improved considerably after our strategic repositioning.

In 2021, the bank recorded a tax benefit of € 400 million compared to an expense of € 894 million in the prior year. The current
year’s tax benefit was mainly driven by tax exempt income and the re-measurement of deferred tax assets

Deutsche Bank AG recorded a net profit of € 1.9 billion in 2021 after a prior year net loss of € 1.8 billion.

After an addition to the revenue reserves of € 950 million, the 2021 distributable profit amounted to € 1.0 billion. The Bank will
propose to the Annual General Meeting a dividend of € 0.20 per share. This will reduce the distributable profit by € 413 million,
depending on the number of shares outstanding at the record date. It will also be proposed to carry forward the remaining
distributable profit.




                                                                                                                                185
Deutsche Bank                                                       Standalone parent company information (HGB)
Annual Report 2021                                                  Deutsche Bank AG Performance




Balance Sheet
                                                                                                                                             Change
in € m.                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020    in € m.      in %
Assets
Receivables from banks and customers incl. balances with central banks and
                                                                                                  666,732            610,390     56,342           9
debt instruments of public-sector entities
Participating interests and investments in affiliated companies                                    26,519             28,190      (1,670)        (6)
Bonds and other securities and equity shares                                                       60,479             89,519     (29,040)       (32)
Trading Assets                                                                                    246,705            241,390       5,315          2
Remaining other assets                                                                             19,673             23,803      (4,130)       (17)
Total assets                                                                                    1,020,109            993,292      26,817          3

Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity
Liabilities to banks and customers                                                                644,803            609,701     35,102           6
Liabilities in certificate form                                                                    79,681             87,002     (7,321)         (8)
Trading liabilities                                                                               197,069            203,986     (6,917)         (3)
Provisions                                                                                          5,972              5,670        302           5
Capital and reserves                                                                               34,913             32,959      1,953           6
Subordinated liabilities, Participation rights capital, Instruments for Additional
                                                                                                   21,333             20,179      1,154           6
Tier 1 Regulatory Capital and Fund for general banking risks
Remaining other liabilities                                                                        36,338             33,794      2,544           8
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity                                                      1,020,109            993,292     26,817           3


Total assets of Deutsche Bank AG amounted to € 1,020.1 billion as of December 31, 2021. The 3 % increase compared to
December 31, 2020 was mainly driven by increases in Receivables from banks and customers including balances with central
banks and debt instruments of public-sector entities, partly offset by decreases in Bonds and other securities and equity
shares. The net growth was mainly funded by higher liabilities to banks and customers.

Total credit extended (excluding reverse repos and securities spot deals)
                                                                                                                                             Change
in € bn.                                                                                      Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020    in € bn.     in %
Claims on customers                                                                                   421                 380         41        11
with a residual period of
  up to 5 years1                                                                                      305                 272         33        12
  over 5 years                                                                                        116                 107          9         8
Loans to banks                                                                                         43                  38          5        13
with a residual period of
  up to 5 years1                                                                                       34                  32          2         6
  over 5 years                                                                                          9                   6          3        51
Total                                                                                                 463                 417         46        11
1
    Including those repayable on demand and those with an indefinite period.


Total credit extended (excluding reverse repos and securities spot deals) increased by € 46.1 billion (11 %), to € 463.4 billion.
This development was primarily driven by an increase in Claims on Customers by € 41.1 billion (11 %) to € 420.6 billion and
an increase in Loans to banks, which are reported under total credit extended, by € 5.0 billion (13 %) to € 42.7 billion.

Receivables from banks (excluding loans) outside trading decreased by € 0.8 billion to € 79.4 billion compared to
December 31, 2020.

Our securities portfolio (excluding trading assets) decreased by € 29.0 billion to € 60.5 billion, mainly driven by an decrease
in bonds.

Trading assets amounted to € 246.7 billion, an increase of € 5.3 billion (2 %) compared to December 31, 2020. This was
mainly driven by an increase in receivables qualifying as trading, which were up by € 16 billion (20) % to € 94.5 billion, partly
offset by a decrease of € 4.6 billion (6) % in securities qualifying as trading and reduced positive market values from trading
derivatives by € 4.9 billion (6 %) to € 77.9 billion.

Investments in affiliated companies decreased by € 1.6 billion to € 26.3 billion. The decrease was attributable to capital
repayments of € 2.0 billion and write-downs of € 0.3 billion. It was partially offset by capital increases of € 0.4 billion and a
positive impact of foreign currency translation of € 0.4 billion.




                                                                                                                                                186
Deutsche Bank                                     Standalone parent company information (HGB)
Annual Report 2021                                Management of Deutsche Bank AG within the Group




Further details of Liabilities to banks, Liabilities to customers and Liabilities in certificate form are provided in the fol lowing
table:

Breakdown of liabilities
                                                                                                                            Change
in € bn.                                                                    Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020   in € bn.          in %
Liabilities to banks                                                                152               142         9              6
  repayable on demand                                                                58                59        (1)            (2)
  with agreed period or notice period                                                94                83        11             13
Liabilities to customers                                                            493               467        26              6
savings deposits                                                                     62                61         2              3
other liabilities
  repayable on demand                                                               334               327         6              2
  with agreed period or notice period                                                97                79        18             22
Liabilities in certificate form                                                      80                87        (7)            (8)
  bonds and notes issued                                                             77                84        (6)            (8)
  other liabilities in certificate form                                               3                 4        (1)           (28)
     thereof: money market instruments                                                2                 3        (1)           (40)


Trading liabilities amounted to € 197.1 billion, a decrease of 6.9 billion (3 %) in comparison to December 31, 2020. This was
driven by decreases in negative market values from trading derivatives by € 14.7 billion (16 %) to € 74.8 billion, partly offset
by an increase of € 10.1 billion (29 %) in securities (short positions) to € 45.2 billion.

Instruments for additional Tier 1 Regulatory Capital amounted to € 8.6 billion compared to € 5.7 billion last year. The year-on-
year movement is the result of new AT1 instruments issued in 2021 as well as currency translation effects.

Capital and reserves of Deutsche Bank AG amounted to € 34.9 billion. The increase of € 1.9 billion is mainly attributable to
the distributable profit generated in 2021.

Consistent with prior years, the Bank has utilized the option available under Section 2a of the German Banking Act (KWG)
with respect to its regulatory capital and presents capital requirements for Deutsche Bank Group only.

In summary: The bank maintained its stable funding, high liquidity base and solid regulatory capital position which is based
on Group capital. For further details, please refer to the liquidity risk and capital adequacy sections in the Risk Report.



Management of Deutsche Bank AG within the Group
The content in this chapter should be read in conjunction with the respective group sections in this Annual Report, especially
“Risk Report”, “Outlook”, “Risks and Opportunities” and “Internal control over financial reporting”.


Risk Management
The impact of the risks on Deutsche Bank AG cannot be isolated from the effects on Deutsche Bank’s other legal entities,
mainly driven by:

– The Group’s management structure, including its Corporate Divisions follows its customers’ needs. The legal structure is
  determined by local legislation and therefore does not necessarily follow the management structure. For example, local
  legislation can determine whether the Group’s business in a certain country is conducted by a branch of Deutsche Bank
  AG or by a separate subsidiary. However, the management has to monitor the risks in the bank’s business – irrespective
  of whether it is transacted by a branch or a subsidiary.
– Adequate risk monitoring and management requires knowledge of the extent to which the Group’s profit situation depends
  on the development of certain risk factors, i.e. on the creditworthiness of individual customers or securities issuers or on
  movements in market prices. The respective exposures therefore need to be analyzed across legal entities. Especially for
  the credit risk attached to a borrower, as it is irrelevant whether the credit exposure to a company is spread over several
  Group companies or concentrated on Deutsche Bank AG. Separate monitoring of the risk affecting Deutsche Bank AG
  alone would neglect the potential exposure facing the Group and, indirectly, Deutsche Bank AG – as the parent – if the
  company became insolvent.
– Individual risk factors are sometimes correlated, and in some cases they are independent of each other. If estimates of the
  nature and extent of this correlation are available, the Group’s management can significantly reduce the overall risk by
  diversifying its businesses across customer groups, issuers and countries. The risk correlation is also independent of the
  Group’s legal and divisional structure. Therefore, management can only optimize the risk-mitigating effects of diversification
  if it manages them Group-wide and across legal entities.



                                                                                                                               187
Deutsche Bank                                   Standalone parent company information (HGB)
Annual Report 2021                              Non-financial Statement for Deutsche Bank AG




For the reasons mentioned, the identification, monitoring and management of all risks in Deutsche Bank AG are integrated
into the Group-wide risk management process. Following Group policies, Deutsche Bank AG adheres to the respective legal
and regulatory requirements.

The Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) which is calculated separately to ensure an appropriate level of liquidity within Deutsche
Bank AG stands at 121 % as of December 31, 2021 compared to 136 % as of December 31, 2020.


Outlook and Strategy
Deutsche Bank AG as the parent company of the Group defines the strategy and planning for the individual Group Divisions.
Deutsche Bank AG participates in the results of the Group Divisions through own activities and profit distribution from
subsidiaries. Therefore, the Group’s outlook encompasses all Group Divisions and is not limited to the parent company. In
addition, financial key performance indicators are solely defined on Group level, except for the amount of distributable profit.


Risks and Opportunities
Risks

Deutsche Bank AG as a solo entity reporting under HGB faces additional risks compared to the Group in that certain
transactions in a given year may lead to higher or lower losses than in the Group financial statements prepared under IFRS.
The following items carry significant risk in this respect:

– Potential valuation adjustments of investments in affiliated companies, driven by local political and economic environment,
  increased local regulatory requirements, restructuring or changes of share prices of listed investments.
– Increase in long-term provisions, especially pension obligations, despite rises in interest rate levels caused by the
  discounting with average interest rates according to section 253 par. 2 German Commercial Code.
– Negative valuation adjustments to plan assets, especially in an environment of rising interest rate levels. Due to the above
  mentioned valuation methodology, there might be no offsetting effect from lower pension obligations if interest rates are
  rising.
– Potential requirement to set up a provision according to German accounting pronouncement IDW RS BFA 3 in case the
  interest bearing banking book does not generate an interest margin sufficient to cover expected credit risk costs and
  administrative expenses. A persisting low interest rate environment and the treatment of coupon payments related to the
  AT1 instruments as expenses under HGB increase this risk.

In addition, profits or retained earnings from affiliated companies might not allow for sufficient dividend payments to Deutsche
Bank AG to facilitate dividend payments by Deutsche Bank AG as targeted.

Opportunities

Deutsche Bank AG as a solo entity reporting under HGB may have additional opportunities compared to the Group in that
certain transactions in a given year are reported in a more beneficial manner than for the Group under IFRS, such as realized
gains which may be recognized in the income statement under IFRS in an earlier period.

In addition, there is the possibility that Deutsche Bank AG as parent entity shows profits in a given year that are higher than
its contribution to the Group’s net income, that result from increased profit distributions from affiliated companies.


Internal control over financial reporting
The controls that are performed for our Group Annual Statements under IFRS apply to our financial statements under HGB
accordingly. In addition to these controls, specific HGB related controls are implemented which include:

– Inter-branch reconciliation and elimination are performed for HGB specific balances; and,
– Analytical reviews of revaluation and reclassification items between IFRS and HGB on the level of foreign branches and
  the German headquarters.



Non-financial Statement for Deutsche Bank AG
The details pursuant to § 340a (1a) German Commercial Code (HGB) in conjunction with § 289b (3) HGB can be found as a
combined separate non-financial report under https://www.db.com/ir/en/annual-reports.htm.



                                                                                                                           188
2
Consolidated Financial
Statements

190    Consolidated Statement of Income
191	Consolidated Statement of                              261   18 – Loans
     Comprehensive Income                                   262   19 – Allowance for credit losses
192    Consolidated Balance Sheet                           264   20 – Transfer of financial assets, assets
                                                                       pledged and received as collateral
193	Consolidated Statement of                              267   21 – Property and equipment
     Changes in Equity
                                                            268   22 – Leases
195    Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows                 269         oodwill and other intangible assets
                                                                  23 – G
197	Notes to the Consolidated Financial                    274         on-current assets and disposal
                                                                  24 – N
     Statements                                                        groups held for sale
197   1 – Significant accounting policies and              275   25 – Other assets and other liabilities
          critical accounting estimates                     275   26 – Deposits
           ecently adopted and new accounting
221	  2 – R                                                 276   27 – Provisions
          pronouncements                                    290         redit related commitments and
                                                                  28 – C
224	  3 – Acquisitions and dispositions                                contingent liabilities
           usiness segments and related
224	  4 – B                                                 291   29 – Other short-term borrowings
          information                                       291         ong-term debt and trust preferred
                                                                  30 – L
                                                                       securities
233	Notes to the Consolidated Income                       292         aturity analysis of the earliest
                                                                  31 – M
     Statement
                                                                       contractual undiscounted cash flows
233	  5 – Net interest income and net gains
                                                                       of financial liabilities
           (losses) on financial assets / liabilities
          at fair value through profit or loss              294   Additional Notes
235	  6 – Commissions and fee income                        294   32 – Common shares
           ains and losses from derecognition
237	  7 – G                                                 295   33 – Employee benefits
          of financial assets measured at                   310   34 – Income taxes
          amortized cost                                    312   35 – Derivatives
237	  8 – Other income (loss)                               316   36 – R elated party transactions
           eneral and administrative expenses
237	  9 – G                                                 318   37 – Information on subsidiaries
238 10 – Restructuring                                      319   38 – Structured entities
239 11 – E arnings per share                               323   39 – C urrent and non-current assets and
                                                                        liabilities
240	Notes to the Consolidated Balance
     Sheet                                                  325   40 – Events after the reporting period
240          inancial assets / liabilities at fair value
       12 – F                                               326   41 – Regulatory capital information
            through profit or loss                          331   42 – S upplementary information to the
241    13 – F
             inancial instruments carried                              consolidated financial statements
            at Fair Value                                               according to Sections 297 (1a) / 315a
255    14 – Fair Value of financial instruments                        HGB
            not carried at fair value                       333   43 – Country by country reporting
257          inancial assets at fair value through
       15 – F                                               334   44 – Shareholdings
            other comprehensive income                      352   45 – Impact of Deutsche Bank’s
257    16 – E
             quity method investments                                  transformation
258    17 – Offsetting financial assets and                353   46 – IBOR Reform
            financial liabilities                           355   Confirmations
Deutsche Bank                                                         Consolidated Statement of Income
Annual Report 2021




Consolidated Statement of Income
in € m.                                                                                                      Notes                 2021                 2020                 2019
Interest and similar income1                                                                                     5              16,599               17,806               25,208
Interest expense                                                                                                 5               5,444                6,280               11,458
Net interest income                                                                                              5              11,155               11,526               13,749
Provision for credit losses                                                                                     19                 515                1,792                  723
Net interest income after provision for credit losses                                                                           10,640                9,734               13,026
Commissions and fee income                                                                                       6              10,934                9,424                9,520
Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through
profit or loss                                                                                                   5               3,045                 2,465                  193
Net gains (losses) from derecognition of financial assets measured at
                                                                                                                 7
amortized cost                                                                                                                         1                 311                     3
Net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value through other
comprehensive income                                                                                                               237                  323                  260
Net income (loss) from equity method investments                                                                16                  98                  120                  110
Other income (loss)                                                                                              8                 (58)                (141)                (671)
Total noninterest income                                                                                                        14,255               12,503                9,416
Compensation and benefits                                                                                       33              10,418               10,471               11,142
General and administrative expenses                                                                              9              10,821               10,259               12,253
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                                                              23                   5                    0                1,037
Restructuring activities                                                                                        10                 261                  485                  644
Total noninterest expenses                                                                                                      21,505               21,216               25,076
Profit (loss) before income taxes                                                                                                3,390                1,021               (2,634)
Income tax expense (benefit)                                                                                    34                 880                  397                2,630
Profit (loss)                                                                                                                    2,510                  624               (5,265)
Profit (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests                                                                             144                  129                  125
Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders and additional
equity components                                                                                                                2,365                   495               (5,390)
1
    Interest and similar income included € 13.2 billion, € 13.9 billion and € 18.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, calculated based on
    effective interest method.




Earnings per Share
in € m.                                                                                                      Notes                 2021                 2020                 2019
Earnings per share:1                                                                                            11
Basic                                                                                                                            € 0.96               € 0.07              (€ 2.71)
Diluted                                                                                                                          € 0.93               € 0.07              (€ 2.71)
Number of shares in million:
Denominator for basic earnings per share –
weighted-average shares outstanding                                                                                            2,096.5              2,108.2              2,110.0
Denominator for diluted earnings per share –
adjusted weighted-average shares after assumed conversions2                                                                    2,143.2              2,170.1              2,110.0
1
    Earnings were adjusted by € 363 million, € 349 million and € 330 million before tax for the coupons paid on Additional Tier 1 Notes in April 2021, April 2020 and April 2019. In
    accordance with IAS 33 the coupons paid on Additional Tier 1 Notes are not attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders and therefore need to be deducted in the calculation.
2
    Due to the net loss situation for 2019 potentially dilutive shares are generally not considered for the earnings per share calculation, because to do so would decrease the net
    loss per share. Under a net income situation however, the number of adjusted weighted average shares after assumed conversion would have been increased by 60 million
    shares for 2019.


The accompanying notes are an integral part of the Consolidated Financial Statements.




                                                                                                                                                                               190
Deutsche Bank                                                 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
Annual Report 2021




Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
in € m.                                                                                                         2021      2020      2019
Profit (loss) recognized in the income statement                                                               2,510      624     (5,265)
Other comprehensive income
Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss
   Remeasurement gains (losses) related to defined benefit plans, before tax                                    804       149     (1,396)
   Net fair value gains (losses) attributable to credit risk related to financial
   liabilities designated as at fair value through profit or loss, before tax                                    (15)      (24)      (3)
Total of income tax related to items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss                            (202)       82      403
Items that are or may be reclassified to profit or loss
   Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income
      Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period, before tax                                       (344)     676       309
      Realized net (gains) losses arising during the period (reclassified to profit or loss),
      before tax                                                                                                (237)    (323)     (260)
   Derivatives hedging variability of cash flows
      Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period, before tax                                          1       (14)       (2)
      Realized net (gains) losses arising during the period (reclassified to profit or loss),
      before tax                                                                                                 (54)        4        (2)
   Assets classified as held for sale
      Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period, before tax                                          0         0         0
      Realized net (gains) losses arising during the period (reclassified to profit or loss),
      before tax                                                                                                   0         0         0
   Foreign currency translation
      Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period, before tax                                      1,117    (1,819)      (20)
      Realized net (gains) losses arising during the period (reclassified to profit or loss),
      before tax                                                                                                 (14)        6        (9)
   Equity Method Investments
      Net gains (losses) arising during the period                                                                (5)        1       (22)
Total of income tax related to items that are or may be reclassified to profit or loss                           285      (122)      193
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                                  1,334    (1,385)     (809)
Total comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                                  3,844      (762)   (6,073)
Attributable to:
   Noncontrolling interests                                                                                      212       59        136
   Deutsche Bank shareholders and additional equity components                                                 3,632     (821)    (6,209)


The accompanying notes are an integral part of the Consolidated Financial Statements.




                                                                                                                                     191
Deutsche Bank                                                        Consolidated Balance Sheet
Annual Report 2021




Consolidated Balance Sheet
in € m.                                                                                                   Notes    Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Assets:
Cash and central bank balances                                                                                        192,021        166,208
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                                                                  7,342          9,130
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements                                     20         8,368          8,533
Securities borrowed                                                                                          20            63              0
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss
   Trading assets                                                                                                     102,396        107,929
   Positive market values from derivative financial instruments                                                       299,732        343,455
   Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit and loss                                        88,965         76,121
   Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                       140            437
Total financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                       12, 13, 20, 35      491,233        527,941
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                             15       28,979         55,834
Equity method investments                                                                                     16        1,091            901
Loans at amortized cost                                                                               18, 19, 20      471,319        426,995
Property and equipment                                                                                    21, 22        5,536          5,549
Goodwill and other intangible assets                                                                          23        6,824          6,725
Other assets 1                                                                                            24, 25      103,785        110,399
Assets for current tax                                                                                                  1,214            986
Deferred tax assets                                                                                          34         6,218          6,058
Total assets                                                                                                        1,323,993      1,325,259

Liabilities and equity:
Deposits                                                                                                     26       603,750        568,031
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements                                 20           747          2,325
Securities loaned                                                                                            20            24          1,697
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
  Trading liabilities                                                                                                  54,718         44,316
  Negative market values from derivative financial instruments                                                        287,108        327,775
  Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                58,468         46,582
  Investment contract liabilities                                                                                         562            526
Total financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                  12, 13, 20, 35      400,857        419,199
Other short-term borrowings                                                                                   29        4,034          3,553
Other liabilities 1                                                                                   22, 24, 25       97,796        114,208
Provisions                                                                                                19, 27        2,641          2,430
Liabilities for current tax                                                                                               600            574
Deferred tax liabilities                                                                                     34           501            561
Long-term debt                                                                                               30       144,485        149,163
Trust preferred securities                                                                                   30           528          1,321
Total liabilities                                                                                                   1,255,962      1,263,063
Common shares, no par value, nominal value of € 2.56                                                         32         5,291          5,291
Additional paid-in capital                                                                                             40,580         40,606
Retained earnings                                                                                                      12,607         10,014
Common shares in treasury, at cost                                                                           32            (6)            (7)
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                                (444)        (1,118)
Total shareholders’ equity                                                                                             58,027         54,786
Additional equity components                                                                                            8,305          5,824
Noncontrolling interests                                                                                                1,698          1,587
Total equity                                                                                                           68,030         62,196
Total liabilities and equity                                                                                        1,323,993      1,325,259
1
    Includes non-current assets and disposal groups held for sale.

The accompanying notes are an integral part of the Consolidated Financial Statements.




                                                                                                                                          192
          Deutsche Bank                                              Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
          Annual Report 2021




Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
                                                                                                                                                                                             Unrealized net gains (losses)
                                                                                                                                                                     Attributable to
                                                                                                                                                                    change in own
                                                                                                                                                    On financial      credit risk of
                                                                                                                                                   assets at fair           financial
                                                                                                                                                  value through            liabilities              On
                                                                                                                                                           other    designated as         derivatives                                            Unrealized     Accumula-
                                                                                                                                                       compre-         at fair value         hedging            On assets         Foreign         net gains       ted other
                                                                                                                               Common shares            hensive      through profit      variability of       classified as      currency     (losses) from    comprehen-              Total     Additional
                                                                               Common shares          Additional    Retained      in treasury,          income,            and loss,      cash flows,        held for sale,   translation,   equity method    sive income,     shareholders’        equity    Noncontrolling
in € m.                                                                          (no par value)   paid-in capital   earnings            at cost       net of tax2         net of tax2      net of tax2          net of tax2    net of tax2     investments       net of tax1         equity    components3         interests   Total equity
Balance as of December 31, 2018                                                         5,291           40,252      16,714                 (15)             (34)                  28               17                    0           228                15             253          62,495          4,675            1,568        68,737
IFRS 16 transition impact                                                                   0                0        (136)                  0                0                    0                0                    0             0                 0               0            (136)             0                0          (137)
Balance as of January 1, 2019 (IFRS 16)                                                 5,291           40,252      16,578                 (15)             (34)                  28               17                    0           228                15             253          62,358          4,675            1,568        68,601
Total comprehensive income (loss), net of tax1                                              0                0      (5,390)                  0               79                   (2)              (3)                   0           108               (15)            168          (5,222)             0              142        (5,079)
Gains (losses) attributable to equity instruments designated as at fair
value through other comprehensive income, net of tax                                         0                 0          0                  0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0               0              0                0              0
Gains (losses) upon early extinguishment attributable to change in
own credit risk of financial liabilities designated as at fair value through
profit and loss, net of tax                                                                  0                 0          0                  0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0              0               0                0             0
Cash dividends paid                                                                          0                 0       (227)                 0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0           (227)              0              (59)         (286)
Coupon on additional equity components, before tax                                           0                 0       (330)                 0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0           (330)              0                0          (330)
Remeasurement gains (losses) related to defined benefit plans, net of
tax                                                                                         0                0         (987)                0                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0            (987)             0               (7)         (994)
Net change in share awards in the reporting period                                          0              118            0                 0                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0             118              0                2           119
Treasury shares distributed under share-based compensation plans                            0                0            0               185                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0             185              0                0           185
Tax benefits related to share-based compensation plans                                      0                0            0                 0                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0               0              0                0             0
Option premiums and other effects from options on common shares                             0                0            0                 0                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0               0              0                0             0
Purchases of treasury shares                                                                0                0            0            (1,359)                0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0          (1,359)             0                0        (1,359)
Sale of treasury shares                                                                     0                0            0             1,185                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0           1,185              0                0         1,185
Net gains (losses) on treasury shares sold                                                  0                3            0                 0                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0               3              0                0             3
Other                                                                                       0              133            0                 0                 0                    0                0                    0            0                  0               0             133            (10)4             (9)          114
Balance as of December 31, 2019                                                         5,291           40,505        9,644                (4)               45                   25               14                    0          336                  0             421          55,857          4,665            1,638        62,160
Total comprehensive income (loss), net of tax1                                              0                0          495                 0               233                  (18)              (7)                   0       (1,747)                (1)         (1,539)         (1,044)             0               57          (987)
Gains (losses) attributable to equity instruments designated as at fair
value through other comprehensive income, net of tax                                         0                 0          0                  0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0               0              0                0              0
Gains (losses) upon early extinguishment attributable to change in
own credit risk of financial liabilities designated as at fair value through
profit and loss, net of tax                                                                  0                 0          0                  0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0              0               0                0             0
Cash dividends paid                                                                          0                 0          0                  0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0              0               0              (77)          (77)
Coupon on additional equity components, before tax                                           0                 0       (349)                 0                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0           (349)              0                0          (349)
Remeasurement gains (losses) related to defined benefit plans, net of
tax                                                                                          0                0         223                 0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0            223              0                 2           225
Net change in share awards in the reporting period                                           0             (131)          0                 0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0           (131)             0                (4)         (135)
Treasury shares distributed under share-based compensation plans                             0                0           0               208                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0            208              0                 0           208
Tax benefits related to share-based compensation plans                                       0               11           0                 0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0             11              0                 0            11
Option premiums and other effects from options on common shares                              0                0           0                 0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0              0              0                 0             0
Purchases of treasury shares                                                                 0                0           0              (279)                 0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0           (279)             0                 0          (279)
Sale of treasury shares                                                                      0                0           0                68                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0             68              0                 0            68
Net gains (losses) on treasury shares sold                                                   0                0           0                 0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0              0              0                 0             0
Other                                                                                        0              221           0                 0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0            221          1,1594              (28)        1,352




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       193
          Deutsche Bank                                                     Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
          Annual Report 2021



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Unrealized net gains (losses)
                                                                                                                                                                                          Attributable to
                                                                                                                                                                                         change in own
                                                                                                                                                                         On financial      credit risk of
                                                                                                                                                                        assets at fair           financial
                                                                                                                                                                       value through            liabilities              On
                                                                                                                                                                                other    designated as         derivatives                                            Unrealized     Accumula-
                                                                                                                                                                            compre-         at fair value         hedging            On assets         Foreign         net gains       ted other
                                                                                                                                                  Common shares              hensive      through profit      variability of       classified as      currency     (losses) from    comprehen-              Total     Additional
                                                                                     Common shares              Additional           Retained        in treasury,            income,            and loss,      cash flows,        held for sale,   translation,   equity method    sive income,     shareholders’        equity    Noncontrolling
in € m.                                                                                (no par value)       paid-in capital          earnings              at cost         net of tax2         net of tax2      net of tax2          net of tax2    net of tax2     investments       net of tax1         equity    components3         interests   Total equity
Balance as of December 31, 2020                                                                5,291              40,606              10,014                     (7)             278                    7                7                    0       (1,411)                (1)         (1,118)         54,786          5,824            1,587        62,196
Total comprehensive income (loss), net of tax1                                                     0                   0               2,365                      0             (398)                 (13)             (40)                   0        1,129                 (5)            672           3,038              0              207         3,245
Gains (losses) attributable to equity instruments designated as at fair
value through other comprehensive income, net of tax                                                0                    0                   0                   0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0               0              0                0              0
Gains (losses) upon early extinguishment attributable to change in
own credit risk
of financial liabilities designated as at fair value through profit and loss,
net of tax                                                                                          0                    0                 (2)                   0                  0                    2                0                   0              0                0                2              0               0                0             0
Cash dividends paid                                                                                 0                    0                  0                    0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0              0               0              (85)          (85)
Coupon on additional equity components, before tax                                                  0                    0               (363)                   0                  0                    0                0                   0              0                0                0           (363)              0                0          (363)
Remeasurement gains (losses) related to defined benefit plans, net of
tax                                                                                                0                   0                 592                    0                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0             592              0                4           597
Net change in share awards in the reporting period                                                 0                 (99)                  0                    0                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0             (99)             0               (2)         (101)
Treasury shares distributed under share-based compensation plans                                   0                   0                   0                  312                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0             312              0                0           312
Tax benefits related to share-based compensation plans                                             0                  29                   0                    0                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0              29              0                0            29
Option premiums and other effects from options on common shares                                    0                 (50)                  0                    0                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0             (50)             0                0           (50)
Purchases of treasury shares                                                                       0                   0                   0                 (346)                 0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0            (346)             0                0          (346)
Sale of treasury shares                                                                            0                   0                   0                   35                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0              35              0                0            35
Net gains (losses) on treasury shares sold                                                         0                   0                   0                    0                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0               0              0                0             0
Other                                                                                              0                  94                   0                    0                  0                     0               0                    0             0                 0               0              94          2,4814             (13)        2,562
Balance as of December 31, 2021                                                                5,291              40,580              12,607                   (6)              (120)                   (3)            (33)                   0          (282)               (6)           (444)         58,027          8,305            1,698        68,030
1
    Excluding remeasurement gains (losses) related to defined benefit plans, net of tax.
2
    Excluding unrealized net gains (losses) from equity method investments.
3
    Includes Additional Tier 1 Notes, which constitute unsecured and subordinated notes of Deutsche Bank and are classified as equity in accordance with IFRS.
4
    Includes net proceeds from issuance, purchase and sale of Additional Equity Components.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            194
Deutsche Bank                                            Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Annual Report 2021




Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows

in € m.                                                                                               2021       2020       2019
Net Income (loss)                                                                                   2,510        624      (5,265)
Cash flows from operating activities:
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Provision for credit losses                                                                           515      1,792        723
Restructuring activities                                                                              261        485        644
Gain on sale of financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income, equity method
investments and other                                                                                (276)      (665)      (277)
Deferred income taxes, net                                                                             19       (296)     1,868
Impairment, depreciation and other amortization, and accretion                                      3,568      2,192      3,993
Share of net income from equity method investments                                                   (197)      (103)      (104)
Income (loss) adjusted for noncash charges, credits and other items                                 6,400      4,030      1,582
Adjustments for net change in operating assets and liabilities:
  Interest-earning time deposits with central banks and banks                                           97     (1,202)    (1,203)
  Central bank funds sold, securities purchased under resale agreements, securities borrowed           102      5,688     (2,529)
  Non-Trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit and loss                     (12,124)     8,597     11,403
  Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                     309       (430)       101
  Loans at amortized cost                                                                          (41,628)    (1,098)   (27,335)
  Other assets                                                                                       8,046    (11,743)     7,464
  Deposits                                                                                          33,269     (2,154)     6,432
  Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss and investment contract
  liabilities1                                                                                      11,144    (3,233)     (3,766)
  Central bank funds purchased, securities sold under repurchase agreements, securities loaned      (3,249)      678      (4,871)
  Other short-term borrowings                                                                          477    (1,638)     (8,954)
  Other liabilities                                                                                (17,823)    7,030     (16,563)
  Senior long-term debt2                                                                            (6,191)   13,282     (16,112)
  Trading assets and liabilities, positive and negative market values from derivative financial
  instruments, net                                                                                 19,559      9,892      22,559
  Other, net                                                                                       (1,341)     3,036      (8,657)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities                                                (2,952)    30,736     (40,449)
Cash flows from investing activities:
Proceeds from:
  Sale of financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                        52,131     38,325     23,721
  Maturities of financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                  21,424     32,964     40,806
  Sale of debt securities held to collect at amortized cost                                            67     10,110        390
  Maturities of debt securities held to collect at amortized cost                                   5,468      4,890        964
  Sale of equity method investments                                                                    23         69          9
  Sale of property and equipment                                                                      114         24         92
Purchase of:
  Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                (46,801)   (82,709)   (56,568)
  Debt Securities held to collect at amortized cost                                                 (7,166)    (4,011)   (20,134)
  Equity method investments                                                                           (100)        (3)       (17)
  Property and equipment                                                                              (550)      (512)      (327)
Net cash received in (paid for) business combinations/divestitures                                      (5)         5      1,762
Other, net                                                                                          (1,010)    (1,045)      (978)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities                                                 23,595     (1,892)   (10,280)
Cash flows from financing activities:
Issuances of subordinated long-term debt                                                             1,1463     1,684          47
Repayments and extinguishments of subordinated long-term debt                                         (42)3   (1,168)      (152)
Issuances of trust preferred securities                                                                  04          0          0
Repayments and extinguishments of trust preferred securities                                        (504)4      (676)    (1,235)
Principal portion of lease payments                                                                  (679)      (653)      (659)
Common shares issued                                                                                      0          0          0
Purchases of treasury shares                                                                         (346)      (279)    (1,359)
Sale of treasury shares                                                                                  35         76     1,191
Additional Equity Components (AT1) issued                                                            2,500      1,153           0
Purchases of Additional Equity Components (AT1)                                                    (2,662)      (792)      (131)
Sale of Additional Equity Components (AT1)                                                           2,642        798        121
Coupon on additional equity components, pre tax                                                      (363)      (349)      (330)
Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests                                                             (85)       (77)       (59)
Net change in noncontrolling interests                                                                 (13)       (28)        (9)
Cash dividends paid to Deutsche Bank shareholders                                                         0          0     (227)
Other, net                                                                                                0          0          0




                                                                                                                           195
Deutsche Bank                                                        Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Annual Report 2021




in € m.                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                 2019
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities                                                                            1,630                 (311)              (2,802)
Net effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents                                                               1,345               (1,074)                1,578
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents                                                                          23,618               27,459              (51,953)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period                                                                             156,328              128,869              180,822
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period                                                                                   179,946              156,328              128,869
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities include
  Income taxes paid (received), net                                                                                             1,031                  805                 945
  Interest paid                                                                                                                 5,557                6,937              11,493
  Interest received                                                                                                            15,807               18,498              23,748
  Dividends received                                                                                                              364                  307               1,309
Cash and cash equivalents comprise
  Cash and central bank balances (not included: Interest-earning time deposits with central
  banks of € 17.9 billion as of December 31, 2021, € 16.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 and €
  16.2 billion as of December 31, 2019)                                                                                      174,089              149,323              121,412
  Interbank balances (w/o central banks) (not included: Interest-earning time deposits with banks
  of € 1.5 billion as of December 31, 2021, 2.1 billion as of December 31 2020 and 2.2 billion as
  of December 31 2019)                                                                                                         5,857                7,006                7,457
Total                                                                                                                        179,946              156,328              128,869
1
    Included are senior long-term debt issuances of € 1.3 billion and € 2.3 billion and repayments and extinguishments of € 1.0 billion and € 3.5 billion through December 31, 2021
    and December 31, 2020, respectively.
2
    Included are issuances of € 33.6 billion and € 67.4 billion and repayments and extinguishments of € 39.5 billion and € 51.4 billion through December 31, 2021 and
    December 31, 2020, respectively.
3
    Non-cash changes for Subordinated Long Term Debt are € 123 million in total and mainly driven by Foreign Exchange movements € 293 million and Fair Value changes of
    € (179) million.
4
    Non-cash changes for Trust Preferred Securities are € (289) million in total and driven by Fair Value changes of € (267) million.


The accompanying notes are an integral part of the Consolidated Financial Statements.




                                                                                                                                                                           196
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Notes to the consolidated financial statements

01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting
estimates
Basis of accounting
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main (“Deutsche Bank” or the “Parent”) is a stock corporation organized
under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany. Deutsche Bank together with all entities in which Deutsche Bank has a
controlling financial interest (collectively the “Group”, “Deutsche Bank” or “DB”) is a global provider of a full range of corporate
and investment banking, private clients and asset management products and services.

The accompanying consolidated financial statements are stated in euros, the presentation currency of the Group. All financial
information presented in million euros has been rounded to the nearest million. The consolidated financial statements have
been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by the International
Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”) and endorsed by the European Union (EU).

EU carve-out

The Group applies fair value hedge accounting for portfolio hedges of interest rate risk (fair value macro hedges) in accordance
with the EU carve-out version of IAS 39. The purpose of applying the EU carve-out version of IAS 39 is to align the Group’s
hedge accounting approach with its risk management practice and the accounting practice of its major European peers. Under
the EU carve-out version of IAS 39, fair value macro hedge accounting may be applied to core deposits and hedge
ineffectiveness is only recognized when the revised estimate of the amount of cash flows in scheduled time buckets falls belo w
the original designated amount of that bucket. If the revised amount of cash flows in scheduled time buckets is more than the
original designated amount then there is no hedge ineffectiveness. Under IFRS as issued by the IASB, hedge accounting for
fair value macro hedges cannot be applied to core deposits. In addition, under IFRS as issued by the IASB hedge
ineffectiveness arises for all fair value macro hedge accounting relationships whenever the revised estimate of the amount of
cash flows in scheduled time buckets is either more or less than the original designated amount of that bucket.

For the financial year ended December 31, 2021, the application of the EU carve-out version of IAS 39 had a negative impact
of € 128 million on profit before tax and of € 85 million on profit after tax. For the financial year ended December 31, 2020, the
application of the EU carve-out had a positive impact of € 18 million on profit before taxes and of € 12 million on profit post
taxes.

The Group’s regulatory capital and ratios thereof are also reported on the basis of the EU carve-out version of IAS 39. The
impact on profit also impacts the calculation of the CET1 capital ratio. For the financial year ended December 31, 2021,
application of the EU carve-out had a negative impact on the CET1 capital ratio of about 2 basis points and a positive impact
of less than 1 basis point for the financial year ended December 31, 2020.

IFRS 7 disclosures

Disclosures about the nature and the extent of risks arising from financial instruments as required by IFRS 7, “Financial
Instruments: Disclosures” are set forth in the Risk Report section of the Management Report and are an integral part of the
Consolidated Financial Statements. These audited disclosures are marked in light blue in the Risk Report.

COVID-19 and Climate risk related disclosures

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Group’s financial statements is reflected as follows:

– The Management Report section includes the impact of COVID-19 on the Group’s financial targets and client franchise, on
  the Global Economy and on the Macroeconomic and market conditions in the chapters Strategy, Outlook and Risks and
  Opportunities, respectively.
– The Risk Report section includes references to the COVID-19 pandemic in the Risk and Capital Management chapter,
  section “IFRS 9 impairment” specifically in the line items “Forward Looking Information”, “IFRS 9-Application of EBA
  guidance regarding Default, Forbearance in light of COVID-19 measures”, “Legislative and non-legislative moratoria and
  public guarantee schemes in light of COVID-19 Pandemic”, “ECL Model results” and “Focus Industries in light of COVID-
  19 Pandemic”. The Risk and Capital Performance chapter includes the impact of supervisory measures in reaction to the
  COVID-19 pandemic in the line item “Minimum capital requirements and additional capital buffers”.


                                                                                                                              197
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                              01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




– The accompanying consolidated financial statements include COVID-19 related disclosures in the notes 5 “Net interest
  income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss”, 13 “Financial instruments
  measured at fair value”, 23 “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” and 33 “Employee Benefits”.
– The section Supplementary Information (Unaudited) describes the impact of COVID-19 on the Group transformation
  charges in the Non-GAAP Financial Measures chapter.

The impact from Climate risk on the Group’s financial statements is reflected as follows:

– The Management Report section includes the impact of Climate risk on the Group’s financial targets and client franchise,
  on the Global Economy and on the Macroeconomic and market conditions in the chapters Risks and Opportunities and
  Sustainability respectively.
– The Risk Report section includes references to Climate risk in the Risk and Capital Framework chapter, the Risk and
  Capital Management chapter (section “Credit Risk Management and Asset Quality”, line item IFRS 9 Impairment) and the
  Enterprise risk management chapter (section Environmental, social and governance risk).

Change in accounting estimates

In the second quarter 2021, the Group refined one of the process-related Stage 2 triggers in the Group’s ECL model. Financial
assets added to the watchlist for discretionary reasons are now transferred to Stage 2, whereas prior to this change only
assets added to the watchlist for mandatory reasons were transferred to Stage 2. The methodology change resulted in an
increase of the Group’s allowance for loan losses of € 60m during the financial year ended December 31, 2021.

In the third quarter 2021, the Group introduced refinements to its IFRS 9 expected credit loss (ECL) model to reflect a new
regulatory definition of default. This new definition of default lead to transactions being migrated to Stage 3. As loss
expectations to the underlying transactions are not expected to materially change, a recalibration of the Loss Given Default
(LGD) factor in the ECL model is required. Starting in the third quarter 2021, the Group recorded a management overlay to
adjust for the expected LGD recalibration impact that will be implemented in the ECL model in 2022. Therefore, while the
implementation of the new definition of default is a change in estimate, the overall effect is immaterial when considered
together with the management overlay. For further details please refer to Risk Report and the section “IFRS 9 impairment”.

In the fourth quarter 2021, a revised discount curve methodology that provides improved data quality for the determination of
the underlying bond universe was approved for use in the UK. The Group’s adoption of this methodology resulted in a net
actuarial gain of around €45m that was recognized through Other Comprehensive Income. This resulted in a corresponding
increase to the overall pension surplus and the net defined benefit asset, due to the net presentation of the pension plan
assets and the defined benefit obligation.


Critical accounting estimates
The preparation of financial statements under IFRS requires management to make estimates and assumptions for certain
categories of assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses
during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from management’s estimates, especially in relation to the COVID-19
pandemic. The Group’s significant accounting policies are described in “Significant Accounting Policies”.

Certain of the Group’s accounting policies require critical accounting estimates that involve complex and subjective judgments
and the use of assumptions, some of which may be for matters that are inherently uncertain and susceptible to change. Such
critical accounting estimates could change from period to period and may have a material impact on the Group’s financial
condition, changes in financial condition or results of operations. Critical accounting estimates could also involve estimates
where management could have reasonably used another estimate in the current accounting period. The Group has identified
the following significant accounting policies that involve critical accounting estimates:

– the impairment of associates (see “Associates” below)
– the impairment of financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income (see “Impairment of Loans and
  Provision for Off-balance Sheet Positions” below)
– the determination of fair value (see “Determination of Fair Value” below)
– the recognition of trade date profit (see “Recognition of Trade Date Profit” below)
– the impairment of loans and provisions for off-balance sheet positions (see “Impairment of Loans and Provision for Off-
  balance Sheet Positions” below)
– the impairment of goodwill and other intangibles (see “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” below)
– the recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets (see “Income Taxes” below)
– the accounting for legal and regulatory contingencies and uncertain tax positions (see “Provisions” below)




                                                                                                                          198
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                 01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Significant accounting policies
The following is a description of the significant accounting policies of the Group. Except for the changes in accounting policies
and changes in accounting estimates described previously and noted below these policies have been consistently applied for
2019, 2020 and 2021.


Principles of consolidation
The financial information in the Consolidated Financial Statements includes the parent company, Deutsche Bank AG, together
with its consolidated subsidiaries, including certain structured entities presented as a single economic unit.

Subsidiaries

The Group’s subsidiaries are those entities which it directly or indirectly controls. Control over an entity is evidenced by the
Group’s ability to exercise its power in order to affect any variable returns that the Group is exposed to through its involvement
with the entity.

The Group sponsors the formation of structured entities and interacts with structured entities sponsored by third parties for a
variety of reasons, including allowing clients to hold investments in separate legal entities, allowing clients to invest jointly in
alternative assets, for asset securitization transactions, and for buying or selling credit protection.

When assessing whether to consolidate an entity, the Group evaluates a range of control factors, namely:

–   the purpose and design of the entity
–   the relevant activities and how these are determined
–   whether the Group’s rights result in the ability to direct the relevant activities
–   whether the Group has exposure or rights to variable returns
–   whether the Group has the ability to use its power to affect the amount of its returns

Where voting rights are relevant, the Group is deemed to have control where it holds, directly or indirectly, more than half of
the voting rights over an entity unless there is evidence that another investor has the practical ability to unilaterally direct the
relevant activities.

Potential voting rights that are deemed to be substantive are also considered when assessing control.

Likewise, the Group also assesses existence of control where it does not control the majority of the voting power but has the
practical ability to unilaterally direct the relevant activities. This may arise in circumstances where the size and dispersi on of
holdings of the shareholders give the Group the power to direct the activities of the investee.

The Group reassesses the consolidation status at least at every quarterly reporting date. Therefore, any changes in the
structure leading to a change in one or more of the control factors, require reassessment when they occur. This includes
changes in decision making rights, changes in contractual arrangements, changes in the financing, ownership or capital
structure as well as changes following a trigger event which was anticipated in the original documentation.

All intercompany transactions, balances and unrealized gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated on
consolidation.

Consistent accounting policies are applied throughout the Group for the purposes of consolidation. Issuances of a subsidiary’s
stock to third parties are treated as non-controlling interests. Profit or loss attributable to non-controlling interests are reported
separately in the Consolidated Statement of Income and Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.

At the date that control of a subsidiary is lost, the Group: a) derecognizes the assets (including attributable goodwill) and
liabilities of the subsidiary at their carrying amounts, b) derecognizes the carrying amount of any non-controlling interests in
the former subsidiary, c) recognizes the fair value of the consideration received and any distribution of the shares of the
subsidiary, d) recognizes any investment retained in the former subsidiary at its fair value and e) recognizes any resulting
difference of the above items as a gain or loss in the income statement. Any amounts recognized in prior periods in other
comprehensive income in relation to that subsidiary would be reclassified to the Consolidated Statement of Income or
transferred directly to retained earnings if required by other IFRSs.




                                                                                                                                199
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Associates

Investments in associates are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. An associate is an entity in which the
Group has significant influence, but not a controlling interest, over the operating and financial management policy decisions
of the entity. Significant influence is generally presumed when the Group holds between 20 % and 50 % of the voting rights.
The existence and effect of potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are considered in assessing
whether the Group has significant influence. Among the other factors that are considered in determining whether the Group
has significant influence are representation on the board of directors (supervisory board in the case of German stock
corporations) and material intercompany transactions. The existence of these factors could require the application of the equity
method of accounting for a particular investment even though the Group’s investment is less than 20 % of the voting stock.

Under the equity method of accounting, the Group’s investments in associates and jointly controlled entities are initially
recorded at cost including any directly related transaction costs incurred in acquiring the associate, and subsequently
increased (or decreased) to reflect both the Group’s pro-rata share of the post-acquisition net income (or loss) of the associate
or jointly controlled entity and other movements included directly in the equity of the associate or jointly controlled entity. The
Group’s share of the results of associates is adjusted to conform to the accounting policies of the Group and is reported in the
Consolidated Statement of Income as Net income (loss) from equity method investments. The Group’s share in the associate’s
profits and losses resulting from intercompany sales is eliminated on consolidation. Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a n
associate or a jointly controlled entity is included in the carrying value of the investment. As goodwill is not reported separately
it is not specifically tested for impairment. Rather, the entire equity method investment is tested for impairment at each balance
sheet date.

If there is objective evidence of impairment, an impairment test is performed by comparing the investment’s recoverable
amount, which is the higher of its value in use and fair value less costs to sell, with its carrying amount. An impairment loss
recognized in prior periods is only reversed if there has been a positive change in the estimates used to determine the
investment’s recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognized. If this is the case the carrying amount of the
investment is increased to its higher recoverable amount. The increased carrying amount of the investment in the associate
attributable to a reversal of an impairment loss shall not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had
no impairment loss been recognized for the investment in prior years.

At the date that the Group ceases to have significant influence over the associate or jointly controlled entity the Group
recognizes a gain or loss on the disposal of the equity method investment equal to the difference between the sum of the fair
value of any retained investment and the proceeds from disposing of the associate and the carrying amount of the investment.
Amounts recognized in prior periods in other comprehensive income in relation to the associate are accounted for on the same
basis as would have been required if the investee had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities.

Critical accounting estimates: The assessment of whether there is objective evidence of impairment may require significant
management judgment and the estimates for impairment could change from period to period based on future events that may
or may not occur. The Group considers this to be a critical accounting estimate.


Foreign currency translation
The Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in euro, which is the presentation currency of the Group. Various entities
in the Group use a different functional currency, being the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity
operates.

An entity records foreign currency revenues, expenses, gains and losses in its functional currency using the exchange rates
prevailing at the dates of recognition.

Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the entity’s functional currency are translated at the
period end closing rate. Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the translation and settlement of these items are
recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income as net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through
profit or loss in order to align the translation amounts with those recognized from foreign currency related transactions
(derivatives) which hedge these monetary assets and liabilities.

Non-monetary items that are measured at historical cost are translated using the historical exchange rate at the date of the
transaction. Translation differences on non-monetary items which are held at fair value through profit or loss are recognized
in profit or loss.




                                                                                                                              200
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




For purposes of translation into the presentation currency, assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated at the
period end closing rate and items of income and expense are translated into euros at the rates prevailing on the dates of the
transactions, or average rates of exchange where these approximate actual rates. The exchange differences arising on the
translation of a foreign operation are included in other comprehensive income. For foreign operations that are subsidiaries,
the amount of exchange differences attributable to any non-controlling interests is recognized in non-controlling interests.

Upon disposal of a foreign subsidiary and associate (which results in loss of control or significant influence over that operation)
the total cumulative exchange differences recognized in other comprehensive income are reclassified to profit or loss.

Upon partial disposal of a foreign operation that is a subsidiary and which does not result in loss of control, the proportionate
share of cumulative exchange differences is reclassified from other comprehensive income to non-controlling interests as this
is deemed a transaction with equity holders. For a partial disposal of an associate which does not result in a loss of significant
influence, the proportionate share of cumulative exchange differences is reclassified from other comprehensive income to
profit or loss.


Interest, commissions and fees
Net interest income – Interest income and expense from all interest-bearing assets and liabilities is recognized as net interest
income using the effective interest rate method. The effective interest rate (EIR) is a method of calculating the amortized cost
of a financial asset or a financial liability and of allocating the interest income or expense over the relevant period using the
estimated future cash flows.

The estimated future cash flows used in the EIR calculation include those determined by all of the contractual terms of the
asset or liability, all fees (including commissions) that are considered to be integral to the effective interest rate, direct and
incremental transaction costs and all other premiums or discounts. However, if the financial instrument is carried at fair value
through profit or loss, any associated fees are recognized in trading income when the instrument is initially recognized,
provided there are no significant unobservable inputs used in determining its fair value.

If a financial asset is credit impaired, interest revenue is calculated by applying the effective interest rate to the amortized cost
amount. The amortized cost amount of a financial asset is the gross carrying amount of a financial asset after adjusting for
any impairment allowance. For assets which are initially recognized as purchased or credit impaired, interest revenue is
calculated through the use of a credit-adjusted effective interest rate which takes into consideration expected credit losses.

The Group presents negative interest paid on interest-bearing assets as interest expense, and interest revenue received from
interest-bearing liabilities as interest income.

The Group presents interest income and expense calculated using the EIR method separately in the Group’s consolidated
statement of income.

Commissions and fee income –The Group applies the IFRS 15, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” five-step revenue
recognition model to the recognition of Commissions and Fee Income, under which income must be recognized when control
of goods and services is transferred, hence the contractual performance obligations to the customer has been satisfied.

Accordingly, after a contract with a customer has been identified in the first step, the second step is to identify the performance
obligation – or a series of distinct performance obligations – provided to the customer. The Group must examine whether the
service is capable of being distinct and is actually distinct within the context of the contract. A promised service is distinct if
the customer can benefit from the service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to th e
customer, and the promise to transfer the service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
The amount of income is measured on the basis of the contractually agreed transaction price for the performance obligation
defined in the contract. If a contract includes a variable consideration, the Group estimates the amount of consideration to
which it will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. Income is recognized in
profit and loss when the identified performance obligation has been satisfied. The Group does not present information about
its remaining performance obligations if it is part of a contract that has an original expected duration of one year or less.

The Group determines the stand-alone selling price at contract inception of a distinct service underlying each performance
obligation in the contract and allocates the transaction price in proportion to those stand-alone selling prices. The stand-alone
selling price is the price at which DB would sell a promised service separately to a customer on an unbundled basis. The best
evidence of a stand-alone selling price is the observable price of a service when the Group sells that service separately in
similar circumstances and to similar customers. If the Group does not sell the service to a customer separately, it estimates
the stand-alone selling price at an amount using a suitable method, for example, in loan syndication transactions the Group
applies the requirements for recognition of trade day profit and considers the price at which other market participants provide
the same service on an unbundled basis. As such when estimating a stand-alone selling price, the Group considers all



                                                                                                                               201
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




information (including market conditions) that is reasonably available to it. In doing so, the Group maximizes the use of
observable inputs and applies estimation methods consistently in similar circumstances.

The Group provides asset management services that give rise to asset management and performance fees and constitute a
single performance obligation. The asset management and performance fee components are variable considerations such
that at each reporting date the Group estimates the fee amount to which it will be entitled in exchange for transferring the
promised services to the customer. The benefits arising from the asset management services are simultaneously received
and consumed by the customer over time. The Group recognizes revenue over time by measuring the progress towards
complete satisfaction of that performance obligation, subject to the removal of any uncertainty as to whether it is highly
probable that a significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue recognized would occur or not. For the management
fee component this is the end of the monthly or quarterly service period. For performance fees this date is when any uncertainty
related to the performance component has been fully removed.

Loan commitment fees related to commitments that are accounted for off balance sheet are recognized in commissions and
fee income over the life of the commitment if it is unlikely that the Group will enter into a specific lending arrangement. If it is
probable that the Group will enter into a specific lending arrangement, the loan commitment fee is deferred until the origination
of a loan and recognized as an adjustment to the loan’s effective interest rate.

Commissions and Fee Income predominantly earned from services that are received and consumed by the customer over
time: Administration, assets under management, foreign commercial business, loan processing and guarantees sundry other
customer services. The Group recognizes revenue from these services over time by measuring the progress towards complete
satisfaction of that performance obligation, subject to the removal of any uncertainty as to whether it is highly probable that a
significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue recognized would occur or not.

Commissions and Fee Income predominantly earned from providing services at a point in time or transaction-type services
include: other securities, underwriting and advisory fees, brokerage fees, local payments, foreign currency/ exchange business
and intermediary fees.

Expenses that are directly related and incremental to the generation of Commissions and Fee Income are presented net in
Commissions and Fee Income in the Consolidated Statement of Income. This includes income and associated expense where
the Group contractually owns the performance obligation (i.e. as Principal) in relation to the service that gives rise to the
revenue and associated expense. In contrast, it does not include situations where the Group does not contractually own the
performance obligation and is acting as agent. The determination of whether the Group is acting as principal or agent is based
on the contractual terms of the underlying service arrangement. The gross Commissions and Fee Income and Expense
amounts are disclosed in “Note 6 – Commissions and Fee Income”.


Financial assets
The Group classifies financial assets in line with the classification and measurement requirements of IFRS 9, where financial
assets are classified based on both the business model used for managing the financial assets and the contractual cash flow
characteristics of the financial asset (known as Solely Payments of Principal and Interest or “SPPI”). There are three business
models available:

– Hold to Collect - Financial assets held with the objective to collect contractual cash flows. They are subsequently measured
  at amortized cost and are recorded in multiple lines on the Group’s consolidated balance sheet.
– Hold to Collect and Sell - Financial assets held with the objective of both collecting contractual cash flows and selling
  financial assets. They are recorded as Financial assets at Fair Value through Other Comprehensive Income on the Group’s
  consolidated balance sheet.
– Other - Financial assets that do not meet the criteria of either “Hold to Collect” or “Hold to Collect and Sell”. They are
  recorded as Financial Assets at Fair Value through Profit or Loss on the Group’s consolidated balance sheet.

The assessment of business model requires judgment based on facts and circumstances upon initial recognition. As part of
this assessment, the Group considers quantitative factors (e.g., the expected frequency and volume of sales) and qualitative
factors such as how the performance of the business model and the financial assets held within that business model are
evaluated and reported to the Group’s key management personnel. In addition to taking into consideration the risks that affect
the performance of the business model and the financial assets held within that business model, in particular, the way in which
those market and credit risks are managed; and how managers of the business are compensated (e.g., whether the
compensation is based on the fair value of the assets managed or on the contractual cash flows collected). This assessment
results in an asset being classified in either a Hold to Collect, Hold to Collect and Sell or Other business model.

If the Group holds a financial asset either in a Hold to Collect or a Hold to Collect and Sell business model, then an assessment
at initial recognition to determine whether the contractual cash flows of the financial asset are Solely Payments of Principal
and Interest on the principal amount outstanding at initial recognition is required to determine the business model classification.


                                                                                                                              202
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                 01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Contractual cash flows, that are SPPI on the principal amount outstanding, are consistent with a basic lending arrangement.
Interest in a basic lending arrangement is consideration for the time value of money and the credit risk associated with the
principal amount outstanding during a particular period of time. It can also include consideration for other basic lending risks
(e.g., liquidity risk) and costs (e.g., administrative costs) associated with holding the financial asset for a particular period of
time; and a profit margin that is consistent with a basic lending arrangement.

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss

Financial assets are classified at fair value through profit or loss if they are held in the Other business model because they
are either held for trading or because they do not meet the criteria for Hold to Collect or Hold to Collect and Sell. In addi tion,
it includes financial assets that meet the criteria for Hold to Collect or Hold to Collect and Sell business model, but the financial
asset fails SPPI or where the Group designated the financial assets under the fair value option.

Financial assets classified as Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are measured at fair value with realized and
unrealized gains and losses included in Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or lo ss.
Interest on interest earning assets such as trading loans and debt securities and dividends on equity instruments are presented
in Interest and Similar Income.

Financial assets classified at fair value through profit or loss are recognized or derecognized on trade date. Trade date is the
date on which the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset.

Trading assets – Financial assets are classified as held for trading if they have been originated, acquired or incurred principally
for the purpose of selling or repurchasing them in the near term, or they form part of a portfolio of identified financial instruments
that are managed together and for which there is evidence of a recent actual pattern of short-term profit-taking. Trading assets
include debt and equity securities, derivatives held for trading purposes, and trading loans. This also includes loan
commitments that are allocated to the Other business model and that are presented as derivatives held for trading.

Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit and loss –The Group assigns any non-trading financial
asset that does not fall into the Hold to Collect nor Hold to Collect and Sell business models into the Other business model
and classifies them as Non-Trading Financial Assets mandatory at Fair Value through Profit and Loss. This includes
predominately reverse repurchase agreements which are managed on a fair value basis. Additionally, any financial asset that
falls into the Hold to Collect or Hold to Collect and Sell business models for which the contractual cash flow characteristic s
are not SPPI is classified by the Group as Non-Trading Financial Assets Mandatory at Fair Value through Profit and Loss.

Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss – Certain financial assets that would otherwise be measured
subsequently at amortized cost or at fair value through other comprehensive income, may be designated at Fair Value through
Profit or Loss if the designation eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or recognition inconsistency. The use of
the fair value option under IFRS 9 is limited. The Group allows the fair value option to be designated only for those financial
instruments for which a reliable estimate of fair value can be obtained.

Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income

A financial asset shall be classified and measured at Fair Value through Other Comprehensive Income (“FVOCI”), if the
financial asset is held in a Hold to Collect and Sell business model and the contractual cash flows are SPPI, unless designated
under the fair value option.

Under FVOCI, a financial asset is measured at its fair value with any changes being recognized in Other Comprehensive
Income (”OCI”) and is assessed for impairment under the IFRS 9 expected credit loss model where provisions are recorded
through profit or loss are recognized based on expectations of potential credit losses. The Group’s impairment policy is
described further in the section “Impairment of Loans and Provision for Off-Balance Sheet Positions (IFRS 9)”. The foreign
currency translation effect for FVOCI assets is recognized in profit or loss, as is the interest component by using the effective
interest method. The amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts are recorded in net interest income. Realized gains
and losses are reported in net gains (losses) on financial assets at FVOCI. Generally, the weighted-average cost method is
used to determine the cost of FVOCI financial assets.

Financial assets classified as FVOCI are recognized or derecognized on trade date. Trade date is the date on which the Group
commits to purchase or sell the asset.

It is possible to designate non-trading equity instruments as FVOCI. However, this category is expected to have limited usage
by the Group and has not been used to date.




                                                                                                                               203
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Financial assets at amortized cost

A financial asset is classified and subsequently measured at amortized cost if the financial asset is held in a Hold to Collect
business model and the contractual cash flows are SPPI.

Under this measurement category, the financial asset is measured at fair value at initial recognition. Subsequently the carrying
amount is reduced for principal payments, plus or minus the cumulative amortization using the effective interest method. The
financial asset is assessed for impairment under the IFRS 9 expected credit loss model where provisions are recognized
based on expectations of potential credit losses. The Group’s impairment of financial instruments policy is described further
in the section “Impairment of Loans and Provision for Off-Balance Sheet Positions (IFRS 9)”. Financial assets measured at
amortized cost are recognized on a settlement date basis.

Financial Assets at amortized cost include predominately Loans at amortized cost, Central bank funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements, Securities borrowed and certain receivables presented in Other Assets.

Modification of financial assets and financial liabilities

When the terms of a financial asset are renegotiated or modified and the modification does not result in derecognition, a gain
or loss is recognized in the income statement as the difference between the original contractual cash flows and the modified
cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate. The modified financial asset will continue to accrued interest at its
original EIR. When a modification results in derecognition the original instrument is derecognized and the new instrument
recognized at fair value.

Non-credit related or commercial renegotiations where an obligor has not experienced a significant increase in credit risk since
origination, and has a readily exercisable right to early terminate the financial asset results in derecognition of the original
agreement and recognition of a new financial asset based on the newly negotiated commercial terms.

For credit related modifications (i.e. those modifications due to significant increase in credit risk since inception) or those where
the obligor does not have the readily exercisable right to early terminate, the Group assesses whether the modified terms
result in the financial asset being significantly modified and therefore derecognized. This assessment includes a quantitative
assessment of the impact of the change in cash flows from the modification of contractual terms and additionally, where
necessary, a qualitative assessment of the impact of the change in the contractual terms. Where these modifications are not
concluded to be significant, the financial asset is not derecognized and is accounted for as a modification as described above.

If the changes are concluded to be significant, the old instrument is derecognized and a new instrument recognized. The
Group then recognizes a credit loss allowance based on 12-month expected credit losses. However, if following a modification
that results in a derecognition of the original financial asset, there is evidence that the new financial asset is credit-impaired
on initial recognition; then the new financial asset should be recognized as an originated credit-impaired financial asset and
initially classified in Stage 3 (refer to section “Impairment of Loans and Provision for Off-Balance Sheet Positions” below).

When the terms of a financial liability are renegotiated or modified then the Group assesses whether the modified terms result
in the financial liability being significantly modified and therefore derecognized. This assessment includes a quantitative
assessment of the impact of the change in cash flows from the modification of contractual terms and additionally, where
necessary, a qualitative assessment of the impact of the change in the contractual terms. Where these modifications are not
concluded to be significant, the financial liability is not derecognized and a gain or loss is recognized in the income statement
as the difference between the original contractual cash flows and the modified cash flows discounted at the original effective
interest rate. Where there is derecognition the original financial liability is derecognized and the new liability recognized at its
fair value.


Loan commitments
Loan commitments remain off-balance sheet, unless allocated to the Other business model and presented as derivatives held
for trading. The Group does not recognize and measure changes in fair value of off-balance sheet loan commitments that
result from changes in market interest rates or credit spreads. However, as specified in the sections “Impairment of Loans and
Provision for Off-Balance Sheet Positions” below, these off-balance sheet loan commitments are in scope of the IFRS 9
impairment model.




                                                                                                                               204
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                 01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Financial liabilities
Under IFRS 9 financial liabilities are measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method, except for financial
liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss include Trading Liabilities, Financial Liabilities Designated at Fair Value
through Profit or Loss and Non-Participating Investment Contracts (“Investment Contracts”). Under IFRS 9 they are carried at
fair value with realized and unrealized gains and losses included in net gains (losses) on financial assets and liabilities at fair
value through profit or loss. For financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit and loss the fair value movements
attributable to the Group’s own credit component for fair value movements is recognized in Other Comprehensive Income.

Financial liabilities classified at fair value through profit or loss are recognized or derecognized on trade date. Trade dat e is
the date on which the Group commits to issue or repurchase the financial liability.

Interest on interest paying liabilities are presented in interest expense for financial instruments at fair value through pro fit or
loss.

Trading liabilities - Financial liabilities that arise from debt issued are classified as held for trading if they have been originated
or incurred principally for the purpose of repurchasing them in the near term. Trading liabilities consist primarily of derivative
liabilities (including certain loan commitments) and short positions. This also includes loan commitments where the resulting
loan upon funding is allocated to the other business model such that the undrawn loan commitment is classified as derivatives
held for trading.

Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss - Certain financial liabilities that do not meet the definition of
trading liabilities are designated at fair value through profit or loss using the fair value option. To be designated at fair value
through profit or loss, financial liabilities must meet one of the following criteria: (1) the designation eliminates or significantly
reduces a measurement or recognition inconsistency; (2) a group of financial liabilities is managed and its performance is
evaluated on a fair value basis in accordance with a documented risk management or investment strategy; or (3) the instrument
contains one or more embedded derivatives unless: (a) the embedded derivative does not significantly modify the cash flows
that otherwise would be required by the contract; or (b) it is clear with little or no analysis that separation is prohibited. In
addition, the Group allows the fair value option to be designated only for those financial instruments for which a reliable
estimate of fair value can be obtained. Financial liabilities which are designated at fair value through profit or loss, under the
fair value option, include repurchase agreements, loan commitments and structured note liabilities.

Investment contracts - All of the Group’s investment contracts are unit-linked contracts that match specific assets held by the
Group. The contracts oblige the Group to use these assets to settle investment contract liabilities. They do not contain
significant insurance risk or discretionary participation features. The contract liabilities are determined using current unit prices
multiplied by the number of units attributed to the contract holders as of the balance sheet date. As this amount represents
fair value, the liabilities have been classified as financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss. Deposits collected under
investment contracts are accounted for as an adjustment to the investment contract liabilities. Investment income attributable
to investment contracts is included in the consolidated statement of Income. Investment contract claims reflect the excess of
amounts paid over the account balance released. Investment contract policyholders are charged fees for policy administration,
investment management, surrenders or other contract services.

Embedded derivatives
Some hybrid financial liability contracts contain both a derivative and a non-derivative component. In such cases, the derivative
component is termed an embedded derivative, with the non-derivative component representing the host financial liability
contract. If the economic characteristics and risks of embedded derivatives are not closely related to those of the host financial
liability contract and the hybrid financial liability contract itself is not carried at fair value through profit or loss, the embedded
derivative is bifurcated and reported at fair value, with gains and losses recognized in net gains (losses) on financial
assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss. The host financial liability contract will continue to be accounted for in
accordance with the appropriate accounting standard. The carrying amount of an embedded derivative is reported in the same
Consolidated balance sheet line item as the host financial liability contract. Certain hybrid financial liability instruments have
been designated at fair value through profit or loss using the fair value option.




                                                                                                                                 205
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Financial liabilities at amortized cost

Financial liabilities measured at amortized cost include long-term and short-term debt issued which are initially measured at
fair value, which is the consideration received, net of transaction costs incurred. Repurchases of issued debt in the market are
treated as extinguishments and any related gain or loss is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Income. A subsequent
sale of own bonds in the market is treated as a reissuance of debt. Financial liabilities measured at amortized cost are
recognized on a settlement date basis.


Offsetting of financial instruments
Financial assets and liabilities are offset, with the net amount presented in the Consolidated balance sheet, only if the Group
holds a currently enforceable legal right to set off the recognized amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or
to realize an asset and settle the liability simultaneously. The legal right to set off the recognized amounts must be enforceable
in both the normal course of business and in the event of default, insolvency or bankruptcy of both the Group and its
counterparty. In all other situations they are presented gross. When financial assets and financial liabilities are offset in the
Consolidated balance sheet, the associated income and expense items will also be offset in the Consolidated Statement of
Income, unless specifically prohibited by an applicable accounting standard.

The majority of the offsetting applied by the Group relates to derivatives and repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.
A significant portion of offsetting is applied to interest rate derivatives and related cash margin balances, which are cleared
through central clearing parties. For further information please refer to Note 17 “Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial
Liabilities”.


Determination of fair value
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an arm’s length
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The fair value of instruments that are quoted in active
markets is determined using the quoted prices where they represent those at which regularly and recently occurring
transactions take place.

The Group measures certain portfolios of financial assets and financial liabilities on the basis of their net risk exposures when
the following criteria are met:

– The group of financial assets and liabilities is managed on the basis of its net exposure to a particular market risk (or risks)
  or to the credit risk of a particular counterparty, in accordance with a documented risk management strategy,
– The fair values are provided to key management personnel, and
– The financial assets and liabilities are measured at fair value through profit or loss.

This portfolio valuation approach is consistent with how the Group manages its net exposures to market and counterparty
credit risks.

Critical accounting estimates – The Group uses valuation techniques to establish the fair value of instruments where prices
quoted in active markets are not available. Therefore, where possible, parameter inputs to the valuation techniques are based
on observable data derived from prices of relevant instruments traded in an active market. These valuation techniques involve
some level of management estimation and judgment, the degree of which will depend on the price transparency for the
instrument or market and the instrument’s complexity.

In reaching estimates of fair value management judgment needs to be exercised. The areas requiring significant management
judgment are identified, documented and reported to senior management as part of the valuation control process and the
standard monthly reporting cycle. The specialist model validation and valuation control groups focus attention on the areas of
subjectivity and judgment.

The level of management judgment required in establishing fair value of financial instruments for which there is a quoted price
in an active market is usually minimal. Similarly there is little subjectivity or judgment required for instruments valued us ing
valuation models which are standard across the industry and where all parameter inputs are quoted in active markets.




                                                                                                                            206
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




The level of subjectivity and degree of management judgment required is more significant for those instruments valued using
specialized and sophisticated models and where some or all of the parameter inputs are less liquid or less observable.
Management judgment is required in the selection and application of appropriate parameters, assumptions and modelling
techniques. In particular, where data are obtained from infrequent market transactions then extrapolation and interpolation
techniques must be applied. Where no market data are available for a particular instrument then pricing inputs are determined
by assessing other relevant sources of information such as historical data, fundamental analysis of the economics of the
transaction and proxy information from similar transactions, and making appropriate adjustment to reflect the actual instrument
being valued and current market conditions. Where different valuation techniques indicate a range of possible fair values for
an instrument then management has to decide what point within the range of estimates appropriately represents the fair value.
Further, some valuation adjustments may require the exercise of management judgment to achieve fair value.

Financial assets and liabilities carried at fair value are required to be disclosed according to the inputs to the valuation method
that are used to determine their fair value. Specifically, segmentation is required between those valued using quoted market
prices in an active market (level 1), valuation techniques based on observable parameters (level 2) and valuation techniques
using significant unobservable parameters (level 3). Management judgment is required in determining the category to which
certain instruments should be allocated. This specifically arises when the valuation is determined by a number of parameters,
some of which are observable and others are not. Further, the classification of an instrument can change over time to reflect
changes in market liquidity and therefore price transparency.

The Group provides a sensitivity analysis of the impact upon the level 3 financial instruments of using a reasonably possible
alternative for the unobservable parameter. The determination of reasonably possible alternatives requires significant
management judgment.

For financial instruments measured at amortized cost (which include loans, deposits and short and long term debt issued) the
Group discloses the fair value. Generally there is limited or no trading activity in these instruments and therefore the fair value
determination requires significant management judgment.

For further discussion of the valuation methods and controls and quantitative disclosures with respect to the determination of
fair value, please refer to Note 13 “Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value” and Note 14 “Fair Value of Financial
Instruments not carried at Fair Value”.


Recognition of trade date profit
Trade date profit is recognized if the fair value of the financial instrument measured at fair value through profit or loss is
obtained from a quoted market price in an active market, or otherwise evidenced by comparison to other observable current
market transactions or based on a valuation technique incorporating observable market data. If there are significant
unobservable inputs used in the valuation technique, the financial instrument is recognized at the transaction price and any
profit implied from the valuation technique at trade date is deferred.

Using systematic methods, the deferred amount is recognized over the period between trade date and the date when the
market is expected to become observable, or over the life of the trade (whichever is shorter). Such methodology is used
because it reflects the changing economic and risk profile of the instrument as the market develops or as the instrument itself
progresses to maturity. Any remaining trade date deferred profit is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income when
the transaction becomes observable. In the rare circumstances that a trade date loss arises, it would be recognized at inception
of the transaction to the extent that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and a reliable estimate of the loss amount can
be made.

Critical Accounting Estimates – Management judgment is required in determining whether there exist significant unobservable
inputs in the valuation technique of the underlying financial instrument (refer to section “Determination of Fair Value” for
management judgment required in establishing fair value of financial instruments). Once deferred, the decision to
subsequently recognize the trade date profit requires a careful assessment of the then current facts and circumstances
supporting observability of parameters and/or risk mitigation.




                                                                                                                             207
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Derivatives and hedge accounting
Derivatives are used to manage exposures to interest rate, foreign currency, credit and other market price risks, including
exposures arising from forecast transactions. All freestanding contracts that are considered derivatives for accounting
purposes are carried at fair value on the Consolidated balance sheet regardless of whether they are held for trading or non-
trading purposes.

The changes in fair value on derivatives held for trading are included in net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair
value through profit or loss.

Hedge accounting

IFRS 9 includes an accounting policy choice to defer the adoption of IFRS 9 hedge accounting and to continue with IAS 39
hedge accounting. The Group decided to exercise this accounting policy choice and did not adopt IFRS 9 hedge accounting
as of January 1, 2018. The Group applies fair value hedge accounting for portfolio hedges of interest rate risk (fair value macro
hedges) in accordance with the EU carve-out version of IAS 39. Under the EU IAS 39 carve-out, fair value macro hedge
accounting may be applied to core deposits and hedge ineffectiveness for all fair value macro hedge accounting applications
is only recognized when the revised estimate of the amount of cash flows in scheduled time buckets falls below the original
designated amount of that bucket and is not recognized when the revised amount of cash flows in scheduled time buckets is
more than the original designated amount.

For accounting purposes there are three possible types of hedges: (1) hedges of changes in the fair value of assets, liabilities
or unrecognized firm commitments (fair value hedges); (2) hedges of the variability of future cash flows from highly probable
forecast transactions and floating rate assets and liabilities (cash flow hedges); and (3) hedges of the translation adjustments
resulting from translating the functional currency financial statements of foreign operations into the presentation currency of
the parent (hedges of net investments in foreign operations).

When hedge accounting is applied, the Group designates and documents the relationship between the hedging instrument
and the hedged item as well as its risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedging transactions and the
nature of the risk being hedged. This documentation includes a description of how the Group will assess the hedging
instrument’s effectiveness in offsetting the exposure to changes in the hedged item’s fair value or cash flows attributable to
the hedged risk. Hedge effectiveness is assessed at inception and throughout the term of each hedging relationship. Hedge
effectiveness is always assessed, even when the terms of the derivative and hedged item are matched.

For hedges of changes in fair value, the changes in the fair value of the hedged asset, liability or unrecognized firm
commitment, or a portion thereof, attributable to the risk being hedged, are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
Income along with changes in the entire fair value of the derivative. When hedging interest rate risk, any interest accrued or
paid on both the derivative and the hedged item is reported in interest income or expense and the unrealized gains and losses
from the hedge accounting fair value adjustments are reported in other revenue. Hedge ineffectiveness is reported in other
revenue and is measured as the net effect of changes in the fair value of the hedging instrument and changes in the fair value
of the hedged item arising from changes in the market rate or price related to the risk(s) being hedged.

If a fair value hedge of a debt instrument is discontinued prior to the instrument’s maturity because the derivative is terminated
or the relationship is de-designated, any remaining interest rate-related fair value adjustments made to the carrying amount
of the debt instrument (basis adjustments) are amortized to interest income or expense over the remaining term of the original
hedging relationship. For other types of fair value adjustments and whenever a fair value hedged asset or liability is sold or
otherwise derecognized, any basis adjustments are included in the calculation of the gain or loss on derecognition.

For hedges of variability in future cash flows, there is no change to the accounting for the hedged item and the derivative is
carried at fair value, with changes in value reported initially in other comprehensive income to the extent the hedge is effective.
These amounts initially recorded in other comprehensive income are subsequently reclassified into the Consolidated
Statement of Income in the same periods during which the forecast transaction affects the Consolidated Statement of Income.
Thus, for hedges of interest rate risk, the amounts are amortized into interest income or expense at the same time as the
interest is accrued on the hedged transaction.

Hedge ineffectiveness is recorded in other income and is measured as changes in the excess (if any) in the absolute
cumulative change in fair value of the actual hedging derivative over the absolute cumulative change in the fair value of the
hypothetically perfect hedge.

When hedges of variability in cash flows attributable to interest rate risk are discontinued, amounts remaining in accumulated
other comprehensive income are amortized to interest income or expense over the remaining life of the original hedge
relationship, unless the hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur in which case the amount will be reclassified into
other income immediately. When hedges of variability in cash flows attributable to other risks are discontinued, the related


                                                                                                                              208
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




amounts in accumulated other comprehensive income are reclassified into either the same Consolidated Statement of Income
caption and period as profit or loss from the forecast transaction, or into other income when the forecast transaction is no
longer expected to occur.

For hedges of the translation adjustments resulting from translating the functional currency financial statements of foreign
operations (hedges of net investments in foreign operations) into the functional currency of the parent, the portion of the
change in fair value of the derivative due to changes in the spot foreign exchange rates is recorded as a foreign currency
translation adjustment in other comprehensive income to the extent the hedge is effective; the remainder is recorded as other
income in the Consolidated Statement of Income.

Changes in fair value of the hedging instrument relating to the effective portion of the hedge are subsequently recognized in
profit or loss on disposal of the foreign operations.

Hedging derivatives are reported as other assets and other liabilities. In the event that a derivative is subsequently de-
designated from a hedging relationship, it is transferred to financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.


Impairment of loans and provision for off-balance sheet positions
The impairment requirements of IFRS 9 apply to all credit exposures that are measured at amortized cost or FVOCI, and to
off balance sheet lending commitments such as loan commitments and financial guarantees. For purposes of the impairment
policy below, these instruments are referred to as (“Financial Assets”)

The determination of impairment losses under IFRS 9 uses an expected credit loss (“ECL”) model, where allowances are
taken upon initial recognition of the Financial Asset, based on expectations of potential credit losses at the time of initial
recognition.

Staged approach to the determination of expected credit losses

IFRS 9 states a three stage approach to impairment for Financial Assets that are not credit impaired at the date of origination
or purchase. This approach is summarized as follows:

– Stage 1: The Group recognizes a credit loss allowance at an amount equal to 12-month expected credit losses for all
  Financial Assets. This represents the portion of lifetime expected credit losses from default events that are expected within
  12 months of the reporting date, assuming that credit risk has not increased significantly after initial recognition.
– Stage 2: The Group recognizes a credit loss allowance at an amount equal to lifetime expected credit losses for those
  Financial Assets which are considered to have experienced a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition. Th is
  requires the computation of ECL based on lifetime probability of default, lifetime loss given default and lifetime exposure at
  default that represents the probability of default occurring over the remaining lifetime of the Financial Asset. Allowance for
  credit losses are higher in this stage because of an increase in credit risk since origination or purchase and the impact of
  a longer time horizon being considered compared to 12 months in Stage 1.
– Stage 3: The Group recognizes a loss allowance at an amount equal to lifetime expected credit losses, reflecting a
  Probability of Default of 100 %, via the expected recoverable cash flows for the asset, for those Financial Assets that are
  credit-impaired. The Group’s definition of default is aligned with the regulatory definition. Financial Assets that are credit-
  impaired upon initial recognition are categorized within Stage 3 with a carrying value already reflecting the lifetime expected
  credit losses. The accounting treatment for these purchased or originated credit-impaired (“POCI”) assets is discussed
  further below.

Significant increase in credit risk

When determining whether the credit risk (i.e., risk of default) of a Financial Asset has increased significantly since initial
recognition, the Group considers reasonable and supportable information that is relevant and available without undue cost or
effort. This includes quantitative and qualitative information based on the Group’s historical experience, credit risk assessment
and forward-looking information (including macro-economic factors). The assessment of significant credit deterioration is key
in determining when to move from measuring an allowance based on 12-month ECLs to one that is based on lifetime ECLs
(i.e., transfer from Stage 1 to Stage 2).

The Group’s framework for determining if there has been a significant increase in credit risk aligns with the internal Credit Risk
Management (“CRM”) process and utilizes:

– Rating related indicators – based on a model that compares lifetime PDs at the reporting date with the lifetime PD
  expectations at the date of initial recognition and subsequently applies a quantile approach to determine a threshold to
  define the trigger point for a financial asset’s transition into Stage 2; and



                                                                                                                            209
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




– Process related indicators – which uses existing risk management indicators, that in Management’s view represent
  situations where the credit risk of financial assets has significantly increased. These include obligors being added to a
  credit watchlist, being mandatorily transferred to workout status, payments being 30 days or more past due or in
  forbearance.

These indicators are discussed further in section “IFRS 9 Impairment Approach” in the Risk Report.

Credit impaired financial assets in Stage 3

The Group has aligned its definition of credit impaired under IFRS 9 to when a Financial Asset has defaulted for regulatory
purposes, according to the Capital Requirements Regulation under Art. 178.

The determination of whether a Financial Asset is credit impaired and therefore in Stage 3 focusses exclusively on default
risk, without taking into consideration the effects of credit risk mitigants such as collateral or guarantees. Specifically, a
Financial Asset is credit impaired and in Stage 3 when:

– The Group considers the obligor is unlikely to pay its credit obligations to the Group. Determination may include forbearance
  actions, where a concession has been granted to the borrower or economic or legal reasons that are qualitative indicators
  of credit impairment; or
– Contractual payments of either principal or interest by the obligor are past due by more than 90 days.

For Financial Assets considered to be credit impaired, the ECL allowance covers the amount of loss the Group is expected to
suffer. The estimation of ECLs is done on a case-by-case basis for non-homogeneous portfolios, or by applying portfolio based
parameters to individual Financial Assets in these portfolios via the Group’s ECL model for homogeneous portfolios. This
estimate includes the use of discounted cash flows that are adjusted for scenarios.

Forecasts of future economic conditions when calculating ECLs are considered. The lifetime expected losses are estimated
based on the probability-weighted present value of the difference between the contractual cash flows that are due to the Group
under the contract; and the cash flows that the Group expects to receive.

A Financial Asset can be classified as credit impaired in Stage 3 but without an allowance for credit losses (i.e., no impairment
loss is expected). This may be due to the value of collateral. The Group’s engine based ECL calculation is conducted on a
monthly basis, whereas the case-by-case assessment of ECL in Stage 3 for non-homogeneous portfolio has to be performed
at least on a quarterly basis.

Purchased or originated credit impaired financial assets in Stage 3

A Financial Asset is considered purchased or originated credit-impaired if there is objective evidence of impairment at the time
of initial recognition. Such credit impaired Financial Assets are termed POCI Financial Assets. POCI Financial Assets are
measured to reflect lifetime expected credit losses, and all subsequent changes in lifetime expected credit losses, whether
positive or negative, are recognized in the income statement as a component of the provision for credit losses. POCI Financial
Assets can only be classified in Stage 3 over the life of the Financial Asset.

Write-offs

The Group reduces the gross carrying amount of a Financial Asset when there is no reasonable expectation of recovery.
Write-offs can relate to a Financial Asset in its entirety, or to a portion of it, and constitute a derecognition event. The Group
considers all relevant information in making this determination, including but not limited to:

– Foreclosure actions taken by the Group which have not been successful or have a high probability of not being successful
– Collateral liquidation which has not, or will not lead to further considerable recoveries
– Situations where no further recoveries are reasonably expected

Write-offs can take place before legal actions against the borrower to recover the debt have been concluded, and a write-off
does not involve the Group forfeiting its legal right to recover the debt.

Interest Rate used in the IFRS 9 model

In the context of the ECL calculation, the Group applies in line with IFRS 9 an approximation of the EIR, which is usually the
contractual interest rate (“CIR”) and which does not materially differ from the EIR. The CIR is deemed to be an appropriate
approximation, as the interest rate is consistently used in the ECL model, interest recognition and for discounting of the ECL.




                                                                                                                            210
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Collateral for financial assets considered in the impairment analysis

IFRS 9 requires cash flows expected from collateral and other credit enhancement to be reflected in the ECL calculation. The
following are key aspects with respect to collateral and guarantees:

– Eligibility of collateral, i.e. which collateral should be considered in the ECL calculation;
– Collateral evaluation, i.e. what collateral (liquidation) value should be used; and
– Projection of the available collateral amount over the life of a transaction.

These concepts are outlined in more detail in section “IFRS 9 Impairment Approach” in the Risk Report.

Critical accounting estimates – The accounting estimates and judgments related to the impairment of Financial Assets is a
critical accounting estimate because the underlying assumptions used can change from period to period and may significantly
affect the Group’s results of operations.

In assessing assets for impairments, management judgment is required, particularly in projecting forward looking information
and scenarios in particular in circumstances of economic and financial uncertainty, when developments and changes to
expected cash flows can occur both with greater rapidity and less predictability. The actual amount of the future cash flows
and their timing may differ from the estimates used by management and consequently may cause actual losses to differ from
reported allowances.

For those non-homogeneous loans in Stage 3 the determination of the impairment allowance often requires the use of
considerable judgment concerning such matters as local economic conditions, the financial performance of the counterparty
and the value of any collateral held, for which there may not be a readily accessible market.

The determination of the expected credit losses in Stages 1 and 2 and for homogeneous loans in Stage 3 is calculated using
the Group’s ECL model. The model incorporates numerous estimates and judgments. The Group performs a regular review
of the model and underlying data and assumptions. The probability of defaults, loss recovery rates and judgments concerning
ability of borrowers in foreign countries to transfer the foreign currency necessary to comply with debt repayments, amongst
other things, are incorporated into this review. Management judgement over the following critical accounting estimates has
increased since early 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic:

– Forward-Looking Information: Forward-Looking Information is incorporated into the measurement of the Group Allowance
  for Credit Losses in terms of adjustments to multi-year PD curves based on macro-economic forecasts. The identification
  of key macro-economic variables (MEVs) reflects a balance of quantitative and qualitative judgements. Statistical analysis,
  including for example, back-testing and model sensitivities, are performed to assess the explanatory power of MEVs, while
  expert input from credit officers ensures management comfort in the overall model behavior. The final model
  parameterization is based on a review & challenge of impacts in internal governance forums and an independent validation
  performed by the Model Risk Management function. Furthermore, conceptual soundness of the estimation approach is
  ensured by model testing analysis prepared as part of model changes and an ongoing monitoring framework in order for
  the ECL provision to reflect management’s best estimate in the calculation of expected credit losses.
– Significant Increase in Credit Risk: In line with the section “IFRS 9 Impairment Approach” in the Risk Report, the Group
  uses rating-related indicators to determine whether a financial asset’s credit risk has significantly increased since inception.
  For financial assets in non-homogeneous portfolios the ratings are determined for every counterparty individually based on
  credit officer’s expert judgement. For financial assets in the homogeneous portfolios (due to the large number of client
  relationships) the rating process is significantly automated with less judgement required by credit officers on individual
  counterparties. For both homogeneous and non-homogenous portfolios the rating-related indicators to determine whether
  the credit risk for a financial asset has significantly increased are based on a model that compares lifetime PDs at the
  reporting date with the lifetime PD expectations at the date of initial recognition and subsequently applying a quantile
  approach to determine a threshold which defines the trigger point for a financial asset’s transition into Stage 2. The
  determination of the quantile to define Stage 2 thresholds are determined by subject matter experts in the Group’s Risk
  function. This represents one of the key critical judgments in the Group’s IFRS 9 framework and is validated on an annual
  basis based on detailed stage-mover analyses, benchmarking with historical behaviors and peer comparisons.
– Stage 3 LGD Setting for Homogeneous Portfolios: The allowance for credit losses in Stage 3 is determined for the Group’s
  homogeneous portfolios by an automated process based on partially time dependent LGDs reflecting the lower recovery
  expectation the longer the client is in default, thereby differentiating between secured and unsecured exposures. The LGDs
  are calibrated using the Group’s loss history built up over preceding decades, experienced market prices of non-performing
  portfolios sold and expert judgement. In the case of less material portfolios, the empirical calibration of the LGD is partially
  supported by expert credit officer judgements, especially for determining the client cure rates as one of the key inputs. The
  LGD settings are validated on an annual basis and are regularly reviewed by the Group’s independent model validation
  process which is part of the Model Risk Management function.

The quantitative disclosures are provided in Note 18 “Loans” and Note 19 “Allowance for credit losses”.


                                                                                                                            211
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                 01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities
Financial asset derecognition

A financial asset is considered for derecognition when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire,
or the Group has either transferred the contractual right to receive the cash flows from that asset, or has assumed an obligation
to pay those cash flows to one or more recipients, subject to certain criteria.

The Group derecognizes a transferred financial asset if it transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.

The Group enters into transactions in which it transfers previously recognized financial assets but retains substantially all the
associated risks and rewards of those assets; for example, a sale to a third party in which the Group enters into a concurrent
total return swap with the same counterparty. These types of transactions are accounted for as secured financing transactions.

In transactions in which substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of a financial asset are neither retained nor
transferred, the Group derecognizes the transferred asset if control over that asset is not retained, i.e., if the transferee has
the practical ability to sell the transferred asset. The rights and obligations retained in the transfer are recognized separately
as assets and liabilities, as appropriate. If control over the asset is retained, the Group continues to recognize the asset to the
extent of its continuing involvement, which is determined by the extent to which it remains exposed to changes in the value of
the transferred asset.

The derecognition criteria are also applied to the transfer of part of an asset, rather than the asset as a whole, or to a group
of similar financial assets in their entirety, when applicable. If transferring a part of an asset, such part must be a specifically
identified cash flow, a fully proportionate share of the asset, or a fully proportionate share of a specifically-identified cash flow.

If an existing financial asset is replaced by another asset from the same counterparty on substantially different terms, or if the
terms of the financial asset are substantially modified (due to forbearance measures or otherwise), the existing financial asset
is derecognized and a new asset is recognized. Any difference between the respective carrying amounts is recognized in the
Consolidated Statement of Income.

Securitization

The Group securitizes various consumer and commercial financial assets, which is achieved via the transfer of these assets
to a structured entity, which issues securities to investors to finance the acquisition of the assets. Financial assets awaiting
securitization are classified and measured as appropriate under the policies in the “Financial Assets and Liabilities” section. If
the structured entity is not consolidated then the transferred assets may qualify for derecognition in full or in part, under the
policy on derecognition of financial assets. Synthetic securitization structures typically involve derivative financial instruments
for which the policies in the “Derivatives and Hedge Accounting” section would apply. Those transfers that do not qualify for
derecognition may be reported as secured financing or result in the recognition of continuing involvement liabilities. The
investors and the securitization vehicles generally have no recourse to the Group’s other assets in cases where the issuers
of the financial assets fail to perform under the original terms of those assets.

Interests in the securitized financial assets may be retained in the form of senior or subordinated tranches, interest only strips
or other residual interests (collectively referred to as “retained interests”). Provided the Group’s retained interests do not result
in consolidation of a structured entity, nor in continued recognition of the transferred assets, these interests are typically
recorded in financial assets at fair value through profit or loss and carried at fair value. Consistent with the valuation of similar
financial instruments, the fair value of retained tranches or the financial assets is initially and subsequently determined using
market price quotations where available or internal pricing models that utilize variables such as yield curves, prepayment
speeds, default rates, loss severity, interest rate volatilities and spreads. The assumptions used for pricing are based on
observable transactions in similar securities and are verified by external pricing sources, where available. Where observable
transactions in similar securities and other external pricing sources are not available, management judgment must be used to
determine fair value. The Group may also periodically hold interests in securitized financial assets and record them at
amortized cost.

In situations where the Group has a present obligation (either legal or constructive) to provide financial support to an
unconsolidated securitization entity a provision will be created if the obligation can be reliably measured and it is probable that
there will be an outflow of economic resources required to settle it.

When an asset is derecognized a gain or loss equal to the difference between the consideration received and the carrying
amount of the transferred asset is recorded. When a part of an asset is derecognized, gains or losses on securitization depend
in part on the carrying amount of the transferred financial assets, allocated between the financial assets derecognized and the
retained interests based on their relative fair values at the date of the transfer.



                                                                                                                               212
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Derecognition of financial liabilities

A financial liability is derecognized when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled or expires. If an ex isting
financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of the ex isting
liability are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and
the recognition of a new liability, and the difference in the respective carrying amounts is recognized in the Consoli dated
Statement of Income.

Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements

Securities purchased under resale agreements (“reverse repurchase agreements”) and securities sold under agreements to
repurchase (“repurchase agreements”) are treated as collateralized financings and are recognized initially at fair value, being
the amount of cash disbursed and received, respectively. The party disbursing the cash takes possession of the securities
serving as collateral for the financing and having a market value equal to, or in excess of, the principal amount loaned. The
securities received under reverse repurchase agreements and securities delivered under repurchase agreements are not
recognized on, or derecognized from, the balance sheet, because the risks and rewards of ownership are not obtained nor
relinquished. Securities delivered under repurchase agreements which are not derecognized from the balance sheet and
where the counterparty has the right by contract or custom to sell or repledge the collateral are disclosed in Note 20 “Transfer
of Financial Assets, Assets Pledged and Received as Collateral”.

The Group allocates reverse repurchase portfolios that are managed on a fair value basis to the other business model under
IFRS 9 and classifies them as “Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss”.

Interest earned on reverse repurchase agreements and interest incurred on repurchase agreements is reported as interest
income and interest expense, respectively.

Securities borrowed and securities loaned

Securities borrowed transactions generally require the Group to deposit cash with the securities lender. In a securities loaned
transaction, the Group generally receives either cash collateral, in an amount equal to or in excess of the market value of
securities loaned, or securities. The Group monitors the fair value of securities borrowed and securities loaned and additional
collateral is disbursed or obtained, if necessary.

The securities borrowed are not themselves recognized in the financial statements. If they are sold to third parties, the
obligation to return the securities is recorded as a financial liability at fair value through profit or loss and any subsequent gain
or loss is included in the Consolidated Statement of Income in net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value
through profit or loss. Securities lent to counterparties are also retained on the Consolidated balance sheet.

The Group records the amount of cash advanced or received as securities borrowed and securities loaned, respectively, in
the Consolidated balance sheet.

Fees received or paid are reported in interest income and interest expense, respectively. Securities lent to counterparties
which are not derecognized from the Consolidated balance sheet and where the counterparty has the right by contract or
custom to sell or repledge the collateral are disclosed in Note 20 “Transfer of Financial Assets, Assets Pledged and Received
as Collateral”.


Goodwill and other intangible assets
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of subsidiaries and associates and represents the excess of the aggregate of the cost of an
acquisition and any non-controlling interests in the acquiree over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired at the
date of the acquisition.

For the purpose of calculating goodwill, fair values of acquired assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities are determine d by
reference to market values or by discounting expected future cash flows to present value. This discounting is either performed
using market rates or by using risk-free rates and risk-adjusted expected future cash flows. Any non-controlling interests in
the acquiree are measured either at fair value or at the non-controlling interests’ proportionate share of the acquiree’s
identifiable net assets (this is determined for each business combination).




                                                                                                                               213
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Goodwill on the acquisition of subsidiaries is capitalized and reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if there a re
indications that impairment may have occurred. For the purposes of impairment testing, goodwill acquired in a business
combination is allocated to cash-generating units (“CGUs”), which are the smallest identifiable groups of assets that generate
cash inflows largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets and that are expected to benefit
from the synergies of the combination and considering the business level at which goodwill is monitored for internal
management purposes. In identifying whether cash inflows from an asset (or a group of assets) are largely independent of the
cash inflows from other assets (or groups of assets) various factors are considered, including how management monitors the
entity’s operations or makes decisions about continuing or disposing of the entity’s assets and operations.

If goodwill has been allocated to a CGU and an operation within that unit is disposed of, the attributable goodwill is includ ed
in the carrying amount of the operation when determining the gain or loss on its disposal.

Corporate assets are allocated to a CGU when the allocation can be done on a reasonable and consistent basis. If this is not
possible, the individual CGU is tested without the corporate assets. They are then tested on the level of the minimum collection
of CGUs to which they can be allocated on a reasonable and consistent basis.

Intangible assets are recognized separately from goodwill when they are separable or arise from contractual or other legal
rights and their fair value can be measured reliably. Intangible assets that have a finite useful life are stated at cost less any
accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses. Customer-related intangible assets that have a finite useful
life are amortized over periods of between 1 and 20 years on a straight-line basis based on their expected useful life. These
assets are tested for impairment and their useful lives reaffirmed at least annually.

Certain intangible assets have an indefinite useful life and hence are not amortized, but are tested for impairment at least
annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred.

Costs related to software developed or obtained for internal use are capitalized if it is probable that future economic benefits
will flow to the Group and the cost can be measured reliably. Capitalized costs are amortized using the straight-line method
over the asset’s useful life which is deemed to be either three, five or ten years. Eligible costs include external direct costs for
materials and services, as well as payroll and payroll-related costs for employees directly associated with an internal-use
software project. Overhead costs, as well as costs incurred during the research phase or after software is ready for use, are
expensed as incurred. Capitalized software costs are tested for impairment either annually if still under development or any
time when there is an indication of impairment once the software is in use.

Critical accounting estimates – The determination of the recoverable amount in the impairment assessment of non-financial
assets requires estimates based on quoted market prices, prices of comparable businesses, present value or other valuation
techniques (such as the cost approach), or a combination thereof, necessitating management to make subjective judgments
and assumptions. Because these estimates and assumptions could result in significant differences to the amounts reported if
underlying circumstances were to change, the Group considers these estimates to be critical.

The quantitative disclosures are provided in Note 23 “Goodwill and other intangible assets”.


Provisions
Provisions are recognized if the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events, if it is probable
that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the
obligation.

The amount recognized as a provision is the best estimate of the consideration required to settle the present obligation as of
the balance sheet date, taking into account the risks and uncertainties surrounding the obligation.

If the effect of the time value of money is material, provisions are discounted and measured at the present value of the
expenditure expected to be required to settle the obligation, using a pre-tax rate that reflects the current market assessments
of the time value of money and the risks specific to the obligation. The increase in the provision due to the passage of time is
recognized as interest expense.

When some or all of the economic benefits required to settle a provision are expected to be recovered from a third party (for
example, because the obligation is covered by an insurance policy), an asset is recognized if it is virtually certain that
reimbursement will be received.

If the Group has a contract that is onerous, the present obligation under the contract is recognized and measured as a
provision. An onerous contract is a contract in which the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations under the contract
exceed the economic benefits expected to be received under it.



                                                                                                                              214
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Critical accounting estimates –The use of estimates is important in determining provisions for potential losses that may arise
from litigation and regulatory proceedings. The Group estimates and provides for potential losses that may arise out of litigation
and regulatory proceedings to the extent that such losses are probable and can be estimated, in accordance with IAS 37,
“Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets”. Significant judgment is required in making these estimates and the
Group’s final liabilities may ultimately be materially different.

Contingencies in respect of legal matters are subject to many uncertainties and the outcome of individual matters is not
predictable with assurance. Significant judgment is required in assessing probability and making estimates in respect of
contingencies, and the Group’s final liability may ultimately be materially different. The Group’s total liability in respect of
litigation, arbitration and regulatory proceedings is determined on a case-by-case basis and represents an estimate of probable
losses after considering, among other factors, the progress of each case, the Group’s experience and the experience of others
in similar cases, and the opinions and views of legal counsel. Predicting the outcome of the Group’s litigation matters is
inherently difficult, particularly in cases in which claimants seek substantial or indeterminate damages. See Note 27
“Provisions” for further information on the uncertainties from the Group’s judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings.


Income taxes
The Group recognizes the current and deferred tax consequences of transactions that have been included in the consolidated
financial statements using the provisions of the respective jurisdictions’ tax laws. Current and deferred taxes are recognized
in profit or loss except to the extent that the tax relates to items that are recognized directly in equity or other comprehensive
income in which case the related tax is recognized either directly in equity or other comprehensive income accordingly.

Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between
the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, unused tax losses
and unused tax credits. Deferred tax assets are recognized only to the extent that it is probable that sufficient taxable pro fit
will be available against which those unused tax losses, unused tax credits and deductible temporary differences can be
utilized.

Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured based on the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period that the asset
is realized or the liability is settled, based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the
balance sheet date.

Current tax assets and liabilities are offset when (1) they arise from the same tax reporting entity or tax group of reporting
entities, (2) the legally enforceable right to offset exists and (3) they are intended to be settled net or realized simultaneously.

Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when the legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets and liabilities exists
and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxing authority on either the same tax
reporting entity or tax group of reporting entities.

Deferred tax liabilities are provided on taxable temporary differences arising from investments in subsidiaries, branches and
associates and interests in joint ventures except when the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by
the Group and it is probable that the difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future. Deferred income tax assets are
provided on deductible temporary differences arising from such investments only to the extent that it is probable that the
differences will reverse in the foreseeable future and sufficient taxable income will be available against which those temporary
differences can be utilized.

Deferred tax related to fair value remeasurement of financial assets classified as FVTOCI, cash flow hedges and other items,
which are charged or credited directly to other comprehensive income, is also credited or charged directly to other
comprehensive income and subsequently recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income once the underlying
transaction or event to which the deferred tax relates is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income.

For share-based payment transactions, the Group may receive a tax deduction related to the compensation paid in shares.
The amount deductible for tax purposes may differ from the cumulative compensation expense recorded. At any reporting
date, the Group must estimate the expected future tax deduction based on the current share price. The associated current
and deferred tax consequences are recognized as income or expense in the consolidated statement of Income for the period.
If the amount deductible, or expected to be deductible, for tax purposes exceeds the cumulative compensation expense, the
excess tax benefit is recognized directly in equity.

Critical accounting estimates – In determining the amount of deferred tax assets, the Group uses historical tax capacity and
profitability information and, if relevant, forecasted operating results based upon approved business plans, including a review
of the eligible carry-forward periods, available tax planning opportunities and other relevant considerations. The analysis of
historical tax capacity includes the determination as to whether a history of recent losses exists at the reporting date. The
determination of a history of recent losses is based on the pre-tax results adjusted for permanent differences and typically


                                                                                                                               215
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




covers the current and the two preceding financial years. Each quarter, the Group re-evaluates its estimate related to deferred
tax assets, including its assumptions about future profitability.

The Group believes that the accounting estimate related to the deferred tax assets is a critical accounting estimate because
the underlying assumptions can change from period to period and requires significant management judgment. For example,
tax law changes or variances in future projected operating performance could result in a change of the deferred tax asset. If
the Group was not able to realize all or part of its net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to its deferred tax assets
would be charged to income tax expense or directly to equity in the period such determination was made. If the Group was to
recognize previously unrecognized deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to its deferred tax asset would be credited
to income tax expense or directly to equity in the period such determination was made.

The use of estimates is also important in determining provisions for potential losses that may arise from uncertain income tax
positions. The Group estimates and provides for potential losses that may arise out of uncertain income tax positions, in
accordance with IAS 12, “Income Taxes” and IFRIC 23, “Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatment”. Significant judgment is
required in making these estimates and the Group’s final liabilities may ultimately be materially different.

For further information on the Group’s deferred taxes (including quantitative disclosures on recognized deferred tax assets)
see Note 34 “Income Taxes”.


Business combinations and non-controlling Interests
The Group uses the acquisition method to account for business combinations. At the date the Group obtains control of the
subsidiary, the cost of an acquisition is measured at the fair value of the consideration given, including any cash or non-cash
consideration (equity instruments) transferred, any contingent consideration, any previously held equity interest in the acquiree
and liabilities incurred or assumed. The excess of the aggregate of the cost of an acquisition and any non-controlling interests
in the acquiree over the Group’s share of the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. If the
aggregate of the acquisition cost and any non-controlling interests is below the fair value of the identifiable net assets (negative
goodwill), a gain is reported in other income. Acquisition-related costs are recognized as expenses in the period in which they
are incurred.

In business combinations achieved in stages (“step acquisitions”), a previously held equity interest in the acquiree is
remeasured to its acquisition-date fair value and the resulting gain or loss, if any, is recognized in profit or loss. Amounts
recognized in prior periods in other comprehensive income associated with the previously held investment would be
recognized on the same basis as would be required if the Group had directly disposed of the previously held equity interest.

Non-controlling interests are shown in the consolidated balance sheet as a separate component of equity, which is distinct
from the Group’s shareholders’ equity. The net income attributable to non-controlling interests is separately disclosed on the
face of the Consolidated Statement of Income. Changes in the ownership interest in subsidiaries which do not result in a
change of control are treated as transactions between equity holders and are reported in additional paid-in capital (“APIC”).


Non-current assets held for sale
Individual non-current assets (and disposal groups) are classified as held for sale if they are available for immediate sale in
their present condition subject only to the customary sales terms of such assets (and disposal groups) and their sale is
considered highly probable. For a sale to be highly probable, management must be committed to a sales plan and be actively
looking for a buyer and has no substantive regulatory approvals outstanding. Furthermore, the assets (and disposal groups)
must be actively marketed at a reasonable sales price in relation to their current fair value and the sale should be expected to
be completed within one year. Non-current non-financial assets (and disposal groups) which meet the criteria for held for sale
classification are measured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs of disposal and are presented within
“Other assets” and “Other liabilities” in the balance sheet. Financial assets and liabilities meeting the criteria continue to be
measured in accordance with IFRS 9. The comparatives are not represented when non-current assets (and disposal groups)
are classified as held for sale. If the disposal group contains financial instruments, no adjustment to their carrying amounts is
permitted.


Property and equipment
Property and equipment includes own-use properties, leasehold improvements, furniture and equipment and software
(operating systems only). Right-of-use assets are presented together with property and equipment on the Group’s
consolidated balance sheet. Own-use properties are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated
impairment losses. Depreciation is generally recognized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the
assets. The range of estimated useful lives is 25 to 50 years for property and 3 to 10 years for furniture and equipment
(including initial improvements to purchased buildings). Leasehold improvements are capitalized and subsequently


                                                                                                                              216
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




depreciated on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the term of the lease and the estimated useful life of the improvement,
which generally ranges from 3 to 25 years. Depreciation of property and equipment is included in general and administrative
expenses. Maintenance and repairs are also charged to general and administrative expenses. Gains and losses on disposals
are included in other income.

Property and equipment are assessed for any indication of impairment at each quarterly reporting date. If such indication
exists, the recoverable amount, which is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and value in use, must be estimated
and an impairment charge is recorded to the extent the recoverable amount is less than its carrying amount. Value in use is
the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from the asset. After the recognition of impairment of an
asset, the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to reflect the asset’s revised carrying amount. If an impairment is
later reversed, the depreciation charge is adjusted prospectively.


Financial guarantees
Financial guarantee contracts are contracts that require the issuer to make specified payments to reimburse the holder for a
loss it incurs because a specified debtor fails to make payments when due in accordance with the terms of a debt instrument.

Financial guarantees written

The Group has chosen to apply the fair value option to certain written financial guarantees that are managed on a fair value
basis. Financial guarantees that the Group has not designated at fair value are recognized initially at fair value on the date the
guarantee is given. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group’s liabilities under such guarantees are measured at the higher
of the amount initially recognized, less cumulative amortization, and the best estimate of the expenditure required to settle
any financial obligation as of the balance sheet date. These estimates are determined based on experience with similar
transactions and history of past losses, and management’s determination of the best estimate.

Any increase in the liability relating to guarantees is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Income in provision for credit
losses.

Financial guarantees purchased

Purchased financial guarantees result in reimbursements under IAS 37 to the extent that the financial guarantee is entered
into to mitigate the credit exposure from debt instruments with HTC or HTC&S business models. This results in recognition of
a reimbursement asset for subsequent increases in the expected credit losses, to the extent it is virtually certain that the
purchased financial guarantee will reimburse the Group for the loss incurred. Accordingly, when the credit risk of the borrower
significantly deteriorates a reimbursement asset is recognized equal to the life-time expected credit losses and is presented
as Other Assets in the Group’s Consolidated Balance Sheet. The corresponding reimbursement gain is recognized as a
reduction in the Provision for credit losses in the Group’s Consolidated Statement of Income.

Purchased financial guarantees entered into to mitigate credit exposure from debt instruments allocated to HTC or HTC&S
business models may also be embedded in Collateralized Loan Obligations (CLO’s) issued by the Group. Such embedded
guarantees are not accounted for separately as a reimbursement asset and instead accounted as part of the CLO’s liability
held at amortized cost. The Group regularly revises its estimated contractual redemption payment (including the benefit of
such embedded guarantees) from the CLO when the credit risk of a borrower covered by the embedded financial guarantee
in the CLO significantly deteriorates. The revision is based on the life-time expected credit losses of the debt instrument (to
the extent covered by the CLO).

Purchased financial guarantees entered into to mitigate credit exposure from debt instruments included in the Other business
model are accounted for at fair value through profit or loss.


Leasing transactions
The Group enters into lease contracts, predominantly for land and buildings, as a lessee. Other categories are company cars
and technical/IT equipment.

The Group assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the contract conveys the right
to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.

The Group applies a single recognition and measurement approach for all leases with a term of more than 12 months, unless
the underlying asset is of low value. As a lessee, at the lease commencement date, the Group recognizes a right-of-use asset
representing its right to use the underlying leased asset and a lease liability representing its obligation to make lease payments.



                                                                                                                             217
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                              01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




The right-of-use asset is measured at cost, less any accumulated depreciation and impairment losses, and adjusted for any
re-measurement of lease liabilities. The cost of right-of-use assets includes the amount of lease liabilities, adjusted for any
lease payments made at or before the commencement date, plus any initial direct costs incurred and an estimate of costs to
dismantle and remove the underlying asset or to restore the site on which it is located, less any lease incentives received.
Right-of-use assets are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the lease term.

The lease liability is measured at the present value of lease payments to be made over the lease term. The lease payments
include fixed payments (including in substance fixed payments) less any lease incentives receivable and variable lease
payments that depend on an index or a rate. Variable lease payments that do not depend on an index or a rate are recognized
as expenses in the period in which the event or condition that triggers the payment occurs.

In calculating the present value of lease payments, the Group uses its incremental borrowing rate at the lease commencement
date because the interest rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable. After the commencement date, the amount of
lease liabilities is increased to reflect the accretion of interest and reduced for the lease payments made. In addition, the
carrying amount of lease liabilities is re-measured if there is a modification, a change in the lease term or a change in the
lease payments (e.g., changes to future payments resulting from a change in an index or rate used to determine such lease
payments).

Right-of-use assets are assessed for any indication of impairment at each quarterly reporting date. If such indication exists,
the recoverable amount, which is the fair value less costs of disposal, must be estimated and an impairment charge is recorded
to the extent the recoverable amount is less than its carrying amount. As right-of-use assets do not have independently
generated cash flows to calculate its value in use, the Group considers any sublease income that could reasonably be earned.
After the recognition of impairment of an asset, the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to reflect the asset’s
revised carrying amount. If an impairment is later reversed, the depreciation charge is adjusted prospectively.

The Group presents right-of-use assets “Property and Equipment” and lease liabilities in “Other Liabilities”.

The Group applies the short-term lease recognition exemption to its short-term leases, i.e., those leases that have a lease
term of 12 months or less from the commencement date. It also applies the lease of low-value assets recognition exemption
to leases of technical/IT equipment that are considered to be low value. Lease payments on short-term leases and leases of
low value assets are recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term.


Employee benefits
Pension benefits

The Group provides a number of pension plans. In addition to defined contribution plans, there are retirement benefit plans
accounted for as defined benefit plans. The assets of all the Group’s defined contribution plans are held in independently
administered funds. Contributions are generally determined as a percentage of salary and are expensed based on employee
services rendered, generally in the year of contribution.

All retirement benefit plans accounted for as defined benefit plans are valued using the projected unit-credit method to
determine the present value of the defined benefit obligation and the related service costs. Under this method, the
determination is based on actuarial calculations which include assumptions about demographics, salary increases and interest
and inflation rates. Actuarial gains and losses are recognized in other comprehensive income and presented in equity in the
period in which they occur. The majority of the Group’s benefit plans is funded.

For the Group’s most significant pension plans in the key countries, the discount rate used at each measurement date is set
based on a high quality corporate bond yield curve – derived based on bond universe information sourced from reputable
third-party index data providers and rating agencies – reflecting the timing, amount and currency of the future expected benefit
payments for the respective plan.

Other post-employment benefits
In addition, the Group maintains unfunded contributory post-employment medical plans for a number of current and retired
employees who are mainly located in the United States. These plans pay stated percentages of eligible medical and dental
expenses of retirees after a stated deductible has been met. The Group funds these plans on a cash basis as benefits are
due. Analogous to retirement benefit plans these plans are valued using the projected unit-credit method. Actuarial gains and
losses are recognized in full in the period in which they occur in other comprehensive income and presented in equity.

Refer to Note 33 “Employee benefits” for further information on the accounting for pension benefits and other post-employment
benefits.



                                                                                                                          218
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Termination benefits

Termination benefits arise when employment is terminated by the Group before the normal retirement date or whenever an
employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benefits. The Group recognizes termination benefits as a
liability and an expense if the Group is demonstrably committed to a detailed formal plan without realistic possibility of
withdrawal. In the case of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy, termination benefits are measured based on the
number of employees expected to accept the offer. Benefits falling due more than twelve months after the end of the reporting
period are discounted to their present value. The discount rate is determined by reference to market yields on high-quality
corporate bonds.

Share-based compensation

Compensation expense for awards classified as equity instruments is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of
the share-based award. For share awards, the fair value is the quoted market price of the share reduced by the present value
of the expected dividends that will not be received by the employee and adjusted for the effect, if any, of restrictions beyond
the vesting date. In case an award is modified such that its fair value immediately after modification exceeds its fair value
immediately prior to modification, a remeasurement takes place and the resulting increase in fair value is recognized as
additional compensation expense.

The Group records the offsetting amount to the recognized compensation expense in additional paid-in capital (“APIC”).
Compensation expense is recorded on a straight-line basis over the period in which employees perform services to which the
awards relate or over the period of the tranches for those awards delivered in tranches. Estimates of expected forfeitures are
periodically adjusted in the event of actual forfeitures or for changes in expectations. The timing of expense recognition relating
to grants which, due to early retirement provisions, include a nominal but non-substantive service period are accelerated by
shortening the amortization period of the expense from the grant date to the date when the employee meets the el igibility
criteria for the award, and not the vesting date. For awards that are delivered in tranches, each tranche is considered a
separate award and amortized separately.

Compensation expense for share-based awards payable in cash is remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date and
recognized over the vesting period in which the related employee services are rendered. The related obligations are included
in other liabilities until paid.


Government Grants
The Group recognizes income from government grants when there is reasonable assurance that it will receive the grant and
will comply with the conditions attached to the grant. The benefit is recognized in the period in which the grant is intended to
compensate the Group for related costs and presented as a reduction of the related expense.

The Group considers the European Central Bank (ECB) as a government or similar body for the purposes of IAS 20. The
effective interest rate for borrowings under the ECB’s Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations III (“TLTRO III”)-
refinancing program is determined based on the applicable ECB refinancing rates outside of TLTRO III. The Group accounts
for the benefit as a government grant. The TLTRO III refinancing program is intended to stimulate credit creation in the
Eurozone area by incentivizing lending by participating banks to non-financial corporations and households. The size of the
benefit depends on the amounts borrowed and on meeting the various lending performance thresholds. During 2021, the IFRS
Interpretations Committee (IFRS IC) received a request to clarify how to account for TLTRO III but, as of the date of these
financial statements, has not yet published its final view on this matter. The Group has closely monitored the IFRS IC
deliberations on this topic and the Group’s assessment of TLTRO III. In this respect while DB awaits the final agenda decision
from the IFRS IC deliberations it does not expect a material impact from the decision.

For further information on the benefit recognized by the Group from the TLTRO III refinancing program see Note 5 “Net interest
income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss”.




                                                                                                                             219
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                01 – Significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates




Obligations to purchase common shares
Forward purchases of Deutsche Bank shares, and written put options where Deutsche Bank shares are the underlying, are
reported as obligations to purchase common shares if the number of shares is fixed and physical settlement for a fixed amount
of cash is required. At inception, the obligation is recorded at the present value of the settlement amount of the forward or
option. For forward purchases and written put options of Deutsche Bank shares, a corresponding charge is made to
shareholders’ equity and reported as equity classified as an obligation to purchase common shares.

The liabilities are accounted for on an accrual basis, and interest costs, which consist of time value of money and dividends,
on the liability are reported as interest expense. Upon settlement of such forward purchases and written put options, the liability
is extinguished and the charge to equity is reclassified to common shares in treasury.

Deutsche Bank common shares subject to such forward contracts are not considered to be outstanding for purposes of basic
earnings per share calculations, but are for dilutive earnings per share calculations to the extent that they are, in fact, dilutive.

Option and forward contracts on Deutsche Bank shares are classified as equity if the number of shares is fixed and physical
settlement is required. All other contracts in which Deutsche Bank shares are the underlying are recorded as financial assets
or liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.


Consolidated statement of cash flows
For purposes of the consolidated statement of cash flows, the Group’s cash and cash equivalents include highly liquid
investments that are readily convertible into cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value. Such
investments include cash and balances at central banks and demand deposits with banks.

The Group’s assignment of cash flows to the operating, investing or financing category depends on the business model
(“management approach”). For the Group the primary operating activity is to manage financial assets and financial liabilities.
Therefore, the issuance and management of long-term borrowings is a core operating activity which is different than for a non-
financial company, where borrowing is not a principal revenue producing activity and thus is part of the financing category.

The Group views the issuance of senior long-term debt as an operating activity. Senior long-term debt comprises structured
notes and asset-backed securities, which are designed and executed by the Corporate Bank and Investment Bank business
line segments and which are revenue generating activities. The other component is debt issued by Treasury, which is
considered interchangeable with other funding sources; all of the funding costs are allocated to business activities to establish
their profitability.

Cash flows related to subordinated long-term debt and trust preferred securities are viewed differently than those related to
senior-long term debt because they are managed as an integral part of the Group’s capital, primarily to meet regulatory capital
requirements. As a result they are not interchangeable with other operating liabilities, but can only be interchanged with equity
and thus are considered part of the financing category.

The amounts shown in the consolidated statement of cash flows do not precisely match the movements in the consolidated
balance sheet from one period to the next as they exclude non-cash items such as movements due to foreign exchange
translation and movements due to changes in the group of consolidated companies.

Movements in balances carried at fair value through profit or loss represent all changes affecting the carrying value. This
includes the effects of market movements and cash inflows and outflows. The movements in balances carried at fair value are
usually presented in operating cash flows.




                                                                                                                               220
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                 02 – Recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements




02 – Recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
The following are those accounting pronouncements which are relevant to the Group and which have been adopted during
2021 in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements.

Interest Rate Benchmark Reform (Amendments to IFRS 9, IAS 39, IFRS 7, IFRS 4 and
IFRS 16)

On January 1, 2021, the Group adopted amendments to IFRS 9, “Financial Instruments”, IAS 39, “Financial Instruments:
Recognition and Measurement“, IFRS 7, “Financial Instruments: Disclosures”, IFRS 4, “Insurance Contracts” and IFRS 16,
“Leases” as Phase 2 of the IASB’s project addressing the potential effects from the reform of the London Interbank Offered
Rate (“LIBOR”) and Eonia (together “IBOR”) on financial reporting. The Group adopted Phase 1 requirements on January 1,
2019. Phase 1 continues to apply for certain USD LIBOR tenors where cessation is not due before June 2023.

The amendments in Phase 2 deal with replacement issues, therefore, they address issues that might affect financial reporting
when an existing interest rate benchmark is replaced. This includes modification of financial assets, financial liabilities and
lease liabilities as well as specific hedge accounting requirements. The amendments introduce a practical expedient for
modifications required by the reform (modifications required as a direct consequence of the IBOR reform and made on an
economically equivalent basis). These modifications are accounted for by updating the effective interest rate. All other
modifications are accounted for using the current IFRS requirements. A similar practical expedient is introduced for lessee
accounting applying IFRS 16, whereby when assessing the lease modification due to the IBOR reform the discount rate used
in calculating the revised carrying value of the lease liability is amended for the change in the benchmark rate only. In add ition,
under the amendments hedge accounting is not discontinued solely because of the IBOR reform. Hedging relationships (and
related documentation) must be amended to reflect modifications to the hedged item, hedging instrument and hedged risk.
Amended hedging relationships should meet all qualifying criteria to apply hedge accounting, including effectiveness
requirements. The amendments also require additional disclosures that allow users to understand the nature and extent of
risks arising from the IBOR reform to which the entity is exposed to and how the entity manages those risks. In addition, the
entity’s progress in transitioning from IBOR to alternative benchmark rates, and how the entity is managing this transition
requires disclosure.

The Group established a Group-wide IBOR & EU Benchmark Regulation transition program in 2018, aimed at managing a
smooth transition from IBOR to the new Risk-free Rates (RFRs). The program is sponsored by the Chief Financial Officer and
has senior representation from each division, region and infrastructure function. The program has been focused on identifying
and quantifying exposures to various interest rate benchmarks, providing the capability to trade products referencing
alternative RFRs and evaluating existing contracts that reference IBOR. Progress updates are provided monthly to the Group’s
IBOR Transition Steering Committee and the CFO. Oversight of the program to prepare for the transition has been a major
focus along with activities across all three lines of defense to minimize risk and disruption to customers and financial markets.

The Group has significant exposure to IBORs predominantly in financial instruments and many of these contracts mature after
the cessation dates for each benchmark. The Group’s exposures from derivatives result from transactions that are entered in
order to make markets for its clients and hedge its risks as well as from loans and deposits, bonds and securitizations. The
Group has detailed plans, processes and procedures in place to support the transition by their planned cessation date.

As part of the program, the Group has undertaken a comprehensive transformation risk assessment which is refreshed
regularly and has identified key inherent risks and mitigating actions to improve the control environment. Key risks include
business strategic risk, legal and compliance risk, conduct risk, liquidity risk, market risk, credit risk, operational risk, transition
risk, model risk, accounting, financial reporting and tax risk, information security and technology transformation risk.

The Group continues to implement plans, aiming to mitigate remaining risks associated with the expected discontinuation of
IBOR-referenced benchmark interest rates. In this regard, the Group:

– reviewed the fallback language for IBOR-linked instruments including the development of a new framework introduced to
  quantify the potential impact of positions difficult to transition, referred to as “tough legacy”;
– a Conduct Risk Advisory forum was initiated in the beginning of 2020, aiming to discuss and review all conduct risks types
  (including new risks and current plan) relevant for the IBOR transition.
– implemented the transition of its interest rate risk hedge accounting programs to the risk-free rates except for USD LIBOR
  which is in progress.
– proactively engaged with clients to facilitate and support the transition of financial instruments to new RFRs.




                                                                                                                                 221
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               02 – Recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements




Although the Group has significant exposure to IBORs predominantly in financial instruments, the amendments did not have
a material impact on transition on the Group’s consolidated financial statements.

In 2021, the Group made positive progress in its transition activities, particularly in IBORs that ceased publication January 3,
2022. Specifically for these IBORs the Group:

– is able to offer clients the majority of products on an RFR equivalent basis.
– has fallback language in place for the vast majority of the Group’s bilateral derivative transactions.
– is proactively using effective fallback language available when conducting any new IBOR based transactions.
– actively transitioned almost all existing contracts from IBOR to RFR with clients.
– migrated its risk and pricing architecture from GBP, CHF, JPY and USD LIBOR to SONIA, SARON, TONAR and SOFR
  respectively, including our capital calculations.
– amended the hedge documentation and hedged risk in hedge accounting relationships for the transition of GBP LIBOR,
  CHF LIBOR, JPY LIBOR, USD LIBOR and EONIA to SONIA, SARON, TONAR, SOFR and ESTR respectively.

As the industry transitions from IBOR to RFR, market liquidity is expected to reduce in IBOR based financial instruments and
to increase in RFR based financial instruments. The valuation of financial instruments is accordingly expected to be derived
with reference to RFRs. This is not expected to have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated income statement. In
some jurisdictions and in some currencies, there are multiple reference rates emerging that may be adopted in certain financial
instruments. The Group continues to examine these reference rates and will monitor market developments over time.

IFRS 4 “Insurance Contracts”

On January 1, 2021, the Group adopted amendments to IFRS 4 “Insurance Contracts” which extend the temporary exemption
to apply IFRS 9 to annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2023. The amendments did not have a material impact on
the Group’s consolidated financial statements.

IFRS 16 “Leases”

On August 30, 2021, the Group adopted amendments to IFRS 16 “Leases” that extend the previously provided exemption for
lessees from assessing whether a COVID-19-related rent concession is a lease modification to rent concessions for which
any reduction in lease payments affects only payments originally due on or before June 30, 2022 (rather than only payments
originally due on or before June 30, 2021). The amendments did not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated
financial statements.


New accounting pronouncements
The following accounting pronouncements were not effective as of December 31, 2021 and therefore have not been applied
in preparing these consolidated financial statements.

IFRS 17 “Insurance Contracts”

In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17, “Insurance Contracts”, which establishes the principles for the recognition,
measurement, presentation and disclosure of insurance contracts within the scope of the standard. IFRS 17 replaces IFRS 4
which has given companies dispensation to carry on accounting for insurance contracts using national accounting standards,
resulting in a multitude of different approaches. IFRS 17 solves the comparison problems created by IFRS 4 by requiring all
insurance contracts to be accounted for in a consistent manner, benefiting both investors and insurance companies. Insurance
obligations will be accounted for using current values – instead of historical cost. The information will be updated regularly,
providing more useful information to users of financial statements. IFRS 17 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2023. Based on the Group’s current business activities it is expected that IFRS 17 will not have a material impact
on the Group’s consolidated financial statements.

In June 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IFRS 17 “Insurance Contracts” that address concerns and implementation
challenges that were identified after IFRS 17 was published in 2017. The amendments are effective for annual periods
beginning on or after January 1, 2023 with early adoption permitted.

In December 2021, the IASB issued amendments to IFRS 17 “Insurance Contracts” that is a narrow-scope amendment to the
transition requirements of IFRS 17 for entities that first apply IFRS 17 and IFRS 9 at the same time. The amendments (if
elected) will be applicable when IFRS 17 is first applied. These amendments have yet to be endorsed by the EU.




                                                                                                                           222
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               02 – Recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements




IAS 37 “Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets”

In May 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 37, “Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets” to clarify
what costs an entity considers in assessing whether a contract is onerous. The amendments specify that the ‘cost of fulfilling’
a contract comprises the ‘costs that relate directly to the contract’. Costs that relate directly to a contract can either be
incremental costs of fulfilling that contract or an allocation of other costs that relate directly to fulfilling contracts. The
amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2022 with early adoption permitted. The
amendments will not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated financial statements.

IAS 12 “Income Taxes”

In May 2021, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 12 “Income Taxes”. They change the deferred tax treatment related to
assets and liabilities in a single transaction such that they introduce an exemption from the initial recognition exemption
provided in IAS 12.15(b) and IAS 12.24. Accordingly, the initial recognition exemption does not apply to transactions in which
both deductible and taxable temporary differences arise on initial recognition that result in the recognition of equal deferred
tax assets and liabilities. The amendments will be effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2023 with early
adoption permitted. The amendment will not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated financial statements. These
amendments have yet to be endorsed by the EU.

IAS 1 “Presentation of Financial Statements”

In January 2020 and July 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 1 “Presentation of Financial Statements: Classification
of Liabilities as Current or Non-Current”. They clarify that the classification of liabilities as current or non-current should be
based on rights that are in existence at the end of the reporting period. The amendments also clarify that the classification is
unaffected by expectations about whether an entity will exercise its right to defer settlement of a liability and make clear that
settlement refers to the transfer to the counterparty of cash, equity instruments, other assets or services. The amendments
will be effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2023 with early adoption permitted. The amendment will
not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated financial statements. These amendments have yet to be endorsed by
the EU.

Improvements to IFRS 2018-2020 Cycles

In May 2020, the IASB issued amendments to multiple IFRS standards, which resulted from the IASB’s annual improvement
project for the 2018-2020 cycles. These comprise amendments that result in accounting changes for presentation, recognition
or measurement purposes as well as terminology or editorial amendments related to IFRS 1 “First-time Adoption of
International Financial Reporting Standards”, IFRS 9 “Financial Instruments”, IFRS 16 “Leases” and IAS 41 “Agriculture”. The
amendments to IFRS 9 clarify which fees an entity includes when assessing whether to derecognize a financial liability. The
amendments will be effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2022 with early adoption permitted. The
amendments will not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated financial statements.




                                                                                                                            223
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               04 – Business segments and related information




03 – Acquisitions and dispositions
Business combinations
In the third quarter 2021, the Group completed the acquisition of 100 % of the shares in Better Payment Germany GmbH, a
Berlin-based early-stage payment service provider. Through this acquisition, the Group intends to expand its market share in
payment processing and acceptance. The fair value of the purchase price paid for the acquisition consisted of € 5 million cash
and an earn-out consideration of € 3 million contingent upon a number of KPIs to be achieved within 3 years following the
acquisition. As part of the preliminary purchase price allocation, the Group recorded goodwill of € 5 million assigned to the
Corporate Bank cash-generating unit (CB CGU). Given the specific valuation of the unit, the new goodwill in CB was
considered impaired and immediately written off in 2021 (refer to Note 23 “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets”).

During the years 2020 and 2019, the Group did not undertake any acquisitions accounted for as business combinations.


Dispositions
The Group finalized several dispositions of subsidiaries/businesses during 2021, 2020 and 2019. These disposals were mainly
comprised of businesses the Group had previously classified as held for sale, including the completion of the transfer of the
Global Prime Finance & Electronic Equities platform to BNP Paribas in 2021, the sale of Postbank Systems AG in 2020 and
the sale of the Private & Commercial Clients business in Portugal in 2019. For more detail, please refer to Note 24 “Non-
Current Assets and Disposal Groups Held for Sale”. The total consideration received for these dispositions (thereof in cash)
in 2021, 2020 and 2019 was € 34 million (cash € 0 million), € 7 million (cash € 7 million) and € 1.8 billion (cash € 1.8 billion),
respectively. The table below shows the assets and liabilities that were included in these disposals. The amounts for 2021
represent the assets and liabilities held for sale of the Global Prime Finance & Electronic Equities business at the end of t he
third quarter 2021 preceding the completion of the transfer to BNP Paribas in 2021.

in € m.                                                                                            2021      2020           2019
Cash and cash equivalents                                                                             0        2               0
All remaining assets                                                                              3,507        7           2,713
Total assets disposed                                                                             3,507        9           2,714
Total liabilities disposed                                                                        8,102       79           1,003




04 – Business segments and related information
The Group’s segmental information has been prepared in accordance with the “management approach”, which requires
presentation of the segments on the basis of the internal management reports of the entity which are regularly reviewed by
the chief operating decision maker, which is the Deutsche Bank Management Board, in order to allocate resources to a
segment and to assess its financial performance.


Business segments
The Group’s segment reporting follows the organizational structure as reflected in its internal management reporting systems,
which are the basis for assessing the financial performance of the business segments and for allocating resources to the
business segments.

The bank’s business operations are organized under the divisional structure comprising the following corporate divisions:

–   Corporate Bank (CB)
–   Investment Bank (IB)
–   Private Bank (PB)
–   Asset Management (AM)
–   Capital Release Unit (CRU)
–   Corporate & Other (C&O)

The segmental information for the corporate divisions PB, AM, CRU and C&O remained unchanged in its scope and the
related segment information is outlined below. There was a change compared to the prior year presentation related to CB as
well as IB which is described in the below section.




                                                                                                                            224
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                               04 – Business segments and related information




From the first quarter 2021 reporting onwards, the Corporate Bank reports revenues in the categories Institutional Client
Services, Corporate Treasury Services and Business Banking. Institutional Client Services comprises of Cash Management
for Institutional clients, Trust and Agency Services, as well as Securities Services, all of which were previously reported under
“Global Transaction Banking’. Corporate Treasury Services provides the full suite of Trade Finance and Lending, as well as
Corporate Cash Management for multinational and German large and mid-sized corporate clients, previously reported under
‘Global Transaction Banking’ and ‘Commercial Banking Germany’. Business Banking – previously reported under ‘Commercial
Banking Germany’ - covers small corporates and entrepreneur clients in Germany and offers a holistic, largely standardized
product suite. The prior years' segmental information is presented in the current structure.

The Investment Bank combines Deutsche Bank’s Fixed Income, Currency (FIC) Sales & Trading and, Origination & Advisory,
as well as Deutsche Bank Research. Commencing from the second quarter of 2021, the Investment Bank presented CLO
recovery gains and losses in its revenue category “Other”. Previously these gains and losses were presented in “FIC Sales &
Trading” and “Origination & Advisory”. The prior years' segmental information is presented in the current structure.

The Private Bank includes Private Bank Germany and International Private Bank. The division covers personal and private
clients, wealthy individuals, entrepreneurs and families. The international businesses also provide services to commercial
clients.

Asset Management operates under the DWS brand. Asset Management provides investment solutions to individual investors
and institutions with a diversified range of Active, Passive and Alternative Asset Management products and services.

Capital Release Unit includes the remaining assets transferred in from Equities Sales & Trading business, lower yielding fixed
income positions, particularly in Rates, former CIB Non-Strategic portfolio as well as a legacy loan portfolio from the former
Private & Commercial Bank in Poland. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the bank concluded the transition of Deutsche Bank’s
Prime Finance and Electronic Equities platform to BNP Paribas.

Corporate & Other includes revenues, costs and resources held centrally that are not allocated to the individual business
segments as well as valuation and timing differences from different accounting methods used for management reporting and
IFRS.

In addition, based on management decisions during the reporting period further divisional changes were introduced. The prior
years' segmental information is presented in the current structure.


Measurement of segment profit or loss
Segment reporting requires a presentation of the segment results based on management reporting methods, including a
reconciliation between the results of the business segments and the consolidated financial statements, which is presented in
the “Segmental Results of Operations” section within this note. The information provided about each segment is based on
internal management reporting about segment profit or loss, assets and other information which is regularly reviewed by the
chief operating decision maker. Segment assets are presented in the Group’s internal management reporting based on a
consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances. The Group`s internal management reporting does
not consider segment liabilities or interest expense separately. Similarly, depreciation and amortization, tax expenses and
other comprehensive income are not presented separately internally and are therefore not disclosed here.

Non-IFRS compliant accounting methods used in the Group’s management reporting represent either valuation or
classification differences. The largest valuation differences relate to measurement at fair value in management reporting
versus measurement at amortized cost under IFRS and to the recognition of trading results from own shares in revenues in
management reporting (in IB) and in equity under IFRS. The major classification difference relates to noncontrolling interest,
which represents the net share of minority shareholders in revenues, provision for credit losses, noninterest expenses and
income tax expenses. Noncontrolling interest is reported as a component of the profit before tax of the businesses in
management reporting (with a reversal in C&O) and a component of net income appropriation under IFRS.

Since the Group’s business activities are diverse in nature and its operations are integrated, certain estimates and judgments
have been made to apportion revenue and expense items among the business segments.

The management reporting systems allocate the Group’s external net interest income according to the value of funding
consumed or provided by each business segment’s activities, in accordance with the bank’s internal funds transfer pricing
(“FTP”) framework. Furthermore, to retain comparability with those competitors that have legally independent units with their
own equity funding, the Group allocates a net notional interest benefit on its consolidated capital, in line with each segmen t’s
proportion of average shareholders’ equity.




                                                                                                                           225
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                 04 – Business segments and related information




Management uses certain measures for equity and related ratios as part of its internal reporting system because it believes
that these measures provide it with a useful indication of the financial performance of the business segments. The Group
discloses such measures to provide investors and analysts with further insight into how management operates the Group’s
businesses and to enable them to better understand the Group’s results. These measures include allocation of average
shareholder’s equity.

Funds Transfer Pricing

In the third quarter of 2019, the FTP framework was changed in order to enhance its effectiveness as a management tool, as
well as to better support funding cost optimization. The new FTP framework aims to more accurately allocate funding costs
and benefits to the firm’s business divisions in a risk-adjusted and uniform manner across the Group. The methodology
changes do not impact overall group funding costs, however, the framework results in a re-allocation of costs and benefits
between segments. This re-allocation resulted in a benefit to the trading businesses, partially offset by a reduction in funding
benefits to the Private Bank (PB) and Corporate Bank (CB) versus the prior methodology. As part of the introduction of the
new framework, a decision was made to hold certain transitional costs in Corporate & Others (C&O), which will reduce over
time, reflecting the long dated nature of liabilities.

The impact of the new FTP framework for the first half of 2019 would have been a positive impact on the results of IB and
CRU of approximately € 140 million and € 30 million, respectively, while the results of CB, PB and C&O would have been
lower by approximately € 20 million, € 30 million and € 120 million, respectively.

Allocation of Average Shareholder’s Equity

Shareholders’ equity is fully allocated to the Group’s segments based on the regulatory capital demand of each segment.
Regulatory capital demand reflects the combined contribution of each segment to the Groups’ Common Equity Tier 1 ratio,
the Groups’ Leverage ratio and the Group’s Capital Loss under Stress. Contributions in each of the three dimensions are
weighted to reflect their relative importance and level of constraint for the Group. Contributions to the Common Equity Tier 1
ratio and the Leverage ratio are measured through Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) and Leverage Ratio Exposure. The Group’s
Capital Loss under Stress is a measure of the Group’s overall economic risk exposure under a defined stress scenario.
Goodwill and other intangible assets are directly attributed to the Group’s segments in order to allow the determination of
allocated tangible shareholders’ equity and the respective returns. Shareholders’ equity and tangible shareholders’ equity is
allocated on a monthly basis and averaged across quarters and for the full year.

US Tax Exempt Securities

Net interest income as a component of net revenues, profit (loss) before tax and related ratios are presented on a fully taxable-
equivalent basis for US tax-exempt securities for the Investment Bank. This enables management to measure performance
of taxable and tax-exempt securities on a comparable basis. This presentation resulted in an increase in Investment Bank net
interest income of € 40 million for full year 2021, € 45 million for full year 2020 and € 35 million for full year 2019. This increase
is offset in Group consolidated figures through a reversal in C&O. The tax rate used in determining the fully taxable-equivalent
of net interest income in respect of the majority of the US tax-exempt securities is 21 % for 2021, 2020 and 2019.

Infrastructure Full-time Employees realignment

In the third quarter of 2021, approximately 9,000 FTEs moved from C&O to the operating business segments driven by the
bank’s decision that the Chief Operating Office (COO) will no longer be a separate Management Board function. Accordingly,
business-related parts of COO that support the Investment Bank and the Corporate Bank, which were previously run in
Infrastructure, moved to those divisions. Comparative segmental financial information has been restated accordingly. This
change did not result in a material financial impact at a segment level, as costs are allocated from C&O to the operating
business segments that are using the service of the respective infrastructure functions and with this move the costs are directly
incurred by the divisions rather than being recharged from C&O.




                                                                                                                               226
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                                   04 – Business segments and related information




Segmental results of operations
The following tables present the results of the Group’s business segments, including the reconciliation to the consolidated
results of operations under IFRS.

                                                                                                                                                                         2021
in € m.                                                  Corporate        Investment            Private         Asset             Capital       Corporate &              Total
(unless stated otherwise)                                    Bank               Bank              Bank     Management        Release Unit            Other       Consolidated
Net revenues1                                               5,150             9,631             8,234            2,708                 26             (339)           25,410
Provision for credit losses                                    (3)              104               446                5                (42)               5               515
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                   1,447             2,199             2,810               822              128             3,012            10,418
General and administrative expenses                         2,659             3,583             4,440               840            1,306            (2,008)           10,821
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                         5                 0                 0                 0                0                   0               5
Restructuring activities                                      42                47               173                 2               (2)                 (0)            261
Total noninterest expenses                                 4,153             5,830             7,423             1,664            1,432              1,004           21,505
Noncontrolling interests                                       0               (17)                0               223                0               (206)               0
Profit (loss) before tax                                   1,000             3,715               366               816           (1,364)            (1,143)           3,390
Cost/income ratio                                           81 %              61 %              90 %              61 %             N/M                 N/M             85 %
Assets2                                                  245,716           615,906           310,496            10,387          131,775              9,713        1,323,993
Additions to non-current assets                               17                 6               149                32                1              1,734            1,939
Risk-weighted assets                                      65,406           140,600            85,366            14,415           28,059             17,783          351,629
Leverage exposure (fully loaded)3                        299,892           530,361           320,692            10,678           38,830             22,761        1,124,667
Average allocated shareholders' equity                    10,301            24,181            12,663             4,815            4,473                   0          56,434
Post-tax return on average shareholders’
equity4                                                        6%              10 %               1%               12 %            (23) %              N/M                3%
Post-tax return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity4                                          7%              11 %               1%               30 %            (23) %              N/M                4%

1
  includes:
   Net interest income                                      2,605             3,332             4,601                 (5)              58              564            11,155
     Net income (loss) from equity method
     investments                                                 3               (34)              40                81                  7                1                98
2
  includes:
   Equity method investments                                    72              462               180               349                25                 4            1,091
N/M – Not meaningful
3
  The Group leverage exposure is presented excluding certain Euro-based exposures facing Eurosystem central banks based on the ECB-decision (EU) 2020/1306 and after
  having obtained permission from the ECB. The segmental leverage exposures are presented without that deduction.
4
  The post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity at the Group level reflects the reported effective tax rate for the Group, which
  was 26 % for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity of the segments, the
  Group effective tax rate was adjusted to exclude the impact of permanent differences not attributed to the segments, so that the segment tax rates were 28 % for the year
  ended December 31, 2021. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report.




                                                                                                                                                                          227
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                                   04 – Business segments and related information




                                                                                                                                                                         2020
in € m.                                                  Corporate        Investment            Private         Asset             Capital       Corporate &              Total
(unless stated otherwise)                                    Bank               Bank              Bank     Management        Release Unit            Other       Consolidated
Net revenues1                                               5,146             9,286             8,126            2,229               (225)            (534)           24,028
Provision for credit losses                                   364               690               711                2                 29               (4)            1,792
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                   1,402             2,081             2,863               740              168             3,217            10,471
General and administrative expenses                         2,813             3,323             4,238               763            1,774            (2,652)           10,259
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                         0                 0                 0                 0                0                  0                0
Restructuring activities                                      28                14               413                22                5                  3              485
Total noninterest expenses                                 4,243             5,418             7,513             1,526            1,947                568           21,216
Noncontrolling interests                                       0                11                 0               157               (0)              (169)               0
Profit (loss) before tax                                     539             3,166               (99)              544           (2,200)              (929)           1,021
Cost/income ratio                                           82 %              58 %              92 %              68 %             N/M                 N/M             88 %
Assets2                                                  237,675           573,536           296,596             9,453          197,667             10,333        1,325,259
Additions to non-current assets                               10                 4               202                32                0              3,174            3,423
Risk-weighted assets                                      57,483           128,292            77,074             9,997           34,415             21,690          328,951
Leverage exposure (fully loaded)3                        273,959           476,097           307,746             4,695           71,726             29,243        1,078,268
Average allocated shareholders' equity                     9,945            22,911            11,553             4,757            6,166                  0           55,332
Post-tax return on average shareholders’
equity4                                                        3%               9%               (1) %              8%             (26) %              N/M                0%
Post-tax return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity4                                          3%              10 %              (1) %             21 %            (27) %              N/M                0%

1
  includes:
   Net interest income                                      2,883             3,325             4,499                  1               61              756            11,526
     Net income (loss) from equity method
     investments                                                 3               22                23                63                  9                1              120
2
  includes:
   Equity method investments                                    69              399                60               304                67                 4              901
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
3
  The Group leverage exposure is presented excluding certain Euro-based exposures facing Eurosystem central banks based on the ECB-decision (EU) 2020/1306 and after
  having obtained permission from the ECB. The segmental leverage exposures are presented without that deduction.
4
  The post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity at the Group level reflects the reported effective tax rate for the Group, which
  was 39 % for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity of the segments, the
  Group effective tax rate was adjusted to exclude the impact of permanent differences not attributed to the segments, so that the segment tax rates were 28 % for the year
  ended December 31, 2020. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report.




                                                                                                                                                                          228
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                                   04 – Business segments and related information




                                                                                                                                                                             2019
in € m.                                                  Corporate        Investment            Private         Asset               Capital       Corporate &                Total
(unless stated otherwise)                                    Bank               Bank              Bank     Management          Release Unit            Other         Consolidated
Net revenues1                                               5,247             7,023             8,239              2,332                217              107             23,165
Provision for credit losses                                   284               110               344                  1                (14)              (0)               723
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                   1,419             2,156             2,971               832                 359             3,406            11,142
General and administrative expenses                         2,829             4,073             4,517               851               2,898            (2,916)           12,253
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible
assets                                                       492                 0               545                   0                0                   0            1,037
Restructuring activities                                     137               169               125                  29              143                  41              644
Total noninterest expenses                                 4,877             6,397             8,159               1,711            3,400                 531           25,076
Noncontrolling interests                                       0                20                (0)                152                1                (173)               0
Profit (loss) before tax                                      86               496              (263)                468           (3,170)               (251)          (2,634)
Cost/income ratio                                           93 %              91 %              99 %                73 %             N/M                  N/M            108 %
Assets2                                                  228,846           501,591           270,334               9,936          259,224              27,743        1,297,674
Additions to non-current assets                                9                 1               167                  27                0               1,117            1,322
Risk-weighted assets                                      58,993           116,367            74,032               9,527           45,874              19,223          324,015
Leverage exposure (fully loaded)                         270,836           432,066           282,575               4,643          126,905              51,016        1,168,040
Average allocated shareholders' equity                    10,340            21,736            11,663               4,865            7,253               4,314           60,170
Post-tax return on average shareholders’
equity3                                                      (0) %              1%              (2) %               7%                (32) %             N/M              (10) %
Post-tax return on average tangible
shareholders’ equity3                                        (0) %              1%              (2) %              18 %               (33) %             N/M              (11) %

1
  includes:
   Net interest income                                      2,635             2,709             4,838                (39)                85             3,520            13,749
     Net income (loss) from equity method
     investments                                                 3               32                14                49                  12                 1                110
2
  includes:
   Equity method investments                                    66              412                82               276                  90                 4                929
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
3
  The post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity at the Group level reflects the reported effective tax rate for the Group, which
  was (100) % for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity and average shareholders’ equity of the segments, the
  Group effective tax rate was adjusted to exclude the impact of permanent differences not attributed to the segments, so that the segment tax rates were 28 % for the year
  ended December 31, 2019. For further information, please refer to “Supplementary Information (Unaudited): Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this annual report.


Corporate Bank
                                                                                                                      2021 increase (decrease)          2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                     from 2020                         from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                    2021           2020            2019            in € m.            in %        in € m.             in %
Net revenues
Corporate Treasury Services                                                3,130           3,125           3,077                 5                0           48                  2
Institutional Client Services                                              1,294           1,274           1,405                20                2         (131)                (9)
Business Banking                                                             726             747             765               (21)              (3)         (18)                (2)
Total net revenues                                                         5,150           5,146           5,247                 4                0         (101)                (2)
Of which:
Net interest income                                                        2,605           2,883           2,635             (278)              (10)         248                 9
Commissions and fee income                                                 2,203           2,078           2,192              125                 6         (114)               (5)
Remaining income                                                             343             185             420              158                85         (235)              (56)
Provision for credit losses                                                   (3)            364             284             (367)             N/M            80                28
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                  1,447          1,402            1,419               46                 3          (17)               (1)
General and administrative expenses                                        2,659          2,813            2,829             (154)               (5)         (16)               (1)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                             5              0              492                5              N/M          (492)             N/M
Restructuring activities                                                      42             28              137               13               47          (108)              (79)
Total noninterest expenses                                                 4,153          4,243            4,877              (90)               (2)        (634)              (13)
Noncontrolling interests                                                       0              0                0                0              N/M             0              N/M
Profit (loss) before tax                                                   1,000            539               86              461               86           453              N/M
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                      246            238              229                8                 3            9                 4
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses, in € bn)                          122            115              119                8                 7           (5)               (4)
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                          13,265         13,320           13,471              (55)               (0)        (151)               (1)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.




                                                                                                                                                                             229
Deutsche Bank                                                    Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                               04 – Business segments and related information




Investment Bank
                                                                                                                  2021 increase (decrease)    2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                 from 2020                   from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                 2021           2020             2019       in € m.         in %        in € m.          in %
Net revenues
Fixed Income, Currency (FIC) Sales & Trading                            7,063           7,074            5,524         (11)            (0)       1,550              28
  Debt Origination                                                      1,573           1,500            1,117          73              5          383              34
  Equity Origination                                                      544             369              148         174             47          221            149
  Advisory                                                                491             244              370         247           101          (126)            (34)
Origination & Advisory                                                  2,608           2,114            1,635         494             23          479              29
Other                                                                     (40)             99             (136)       (139)          N/M           235            N/M
Total net revenues                                                      9,631           9,286            7,023         345              4        2,263              32
Provision for credit losses                                               104             690              110        (587)           (85)         581            N/M
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                               2,199           2,081            2,156         118              6          (75)             (3)
General and administrative expenses                                     3,583           3,323            4,073         260              8         (750)            (18)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                          0               0                0           0           N/M             0            N/M
Restructuring activities                                                   47              14              169          33           N/M          (155)            (92)
Total noninterest expenses                                              5,830           5,418            6,397         411              8         (979)            (15)
Noncontrolling interests                                                  (17)             11               20         (29)          N/M            (8)            (41)
Profit (loss) before tax                                                3,715           3,166              496         549            17         2,670            N/M
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                   616             574              502          42              7           72              14
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses, in € bn)                        93              69               75          24            34            (6)             (8)
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                        7,202           7,584            7,494        (382)            (5)          90               1
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.


Private Bank
                                                                                                                  2021 increase (decrease)    2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                 from 2020                   from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                 2021           2020             2019       in € m.         in %        in € m.          in %
Net revenues:
Private Bank Germany                                                    5,008           4,989            5,109          19              0          (120)               (2)
International Private Bank                                              3,226           3,136            3,130          90              3             7                 0
   IPB Personal Banking1                                                  908             870              905          38              4           (34)               (4)
   IPB Private Banking2 and Wealth Management                           2,318           2,266            2,225          52              2            41                 2
Total net revenues                                                      8,234           8,126            8,239         109              1          (113)               (1)
   Of which:
   Net interest income                                                  4,601           4,499            4,838         102              2          (339)           (7)
   Commissions and fee income                                           3,207           3,052            2,866         155              5           187             7
   Remaining income                                                       426             574              534        (148)           (26)           40             7
Provision for credit losses                                               446             711              344        (265)           (37)          367           107
Noninterest expenses:
Compensation and benefits                                               2,810          2,863             2,971         (53)            (2)         (108)            (4)
General and administrative expenses                                     4,440          4,238             4,517         202              5          (280)            (6)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                          0              0               545           0           N/M           (545)          N/M
Restructuring activities                                                  173            413               125        (240)           (58)          287           N/M
Total noninterest expenses                                              7,423          7,513             8,159         (91)            (1)         (645)            (8)
Noncontrolling interests                                                    0              0                (0)         (0)           (87)            1           N/M
Profit (loss) before tax                                                  366            (99)             (263)        465           N/M            164            (62)
Total assets (in € bn)3                                                   310            297               270          14              5            26             10
Loans (gross of allowance for loan losses, in € bn)                       254            237               227          17              7            10              5
Assets under Management (in € bn)4                                        553            493               482          59             12            11              2
Net flows (in € bn)                                                        30             16                 4          14             88            12           N/M
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                       28,100         29,764            31,421      (1,665)            (6)       (1,657)            (5)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Including small businesses in Italy, Spain and India.
2
  Including small & mid caps in Italy, Spain and India.
3
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.
4
  We define assets under management as (a) assets we hold on behalf of customers for investment purposes and/or (b) client assets that are managed by us. We manage
  assets under management on a discretionary or advisory basis, or these assets are deposited with us. Deposits are considered assets under management if they serve
  investment purposes. In the Private Bank Germany, IPB Personal Banking and IPB Private Banking, this includes time deposits and savings deposits. In IPB Wealth
  Management, it is assumed that all customer deposits are held with us primarily for investment purposes.




                                                                                                                                                                 230
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                                    04 – Business segments and related information




Asset Management
                                                                                                                   2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                  from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                     2021          2020          2019         in € m.        in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues
Management Fees                                                             2,370         2,136          2,141           233           11           (5)            (0)
Performance and transaction fees                                              212            90            201           122          135         (111)           (55)
Other                                                                         126             3            (10)          123          N/M           13           N/M
Total net revenues                                                          2,708         2,229          2,332           478           21         (103)            (4)
Provision for credit losses                                                     5             2              1             3          148            1             59
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                     822           740            832            82            11         (92)           (11)
General and administrative expenses                                           840           763            851            77            10         (88)           (10)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                              0             0              0            (0)         N/M            0           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                        2            22             29           (20)          (92)         (6)           (22)
Total noninterest expenses                                                  1,664         1,526          1,711           138             9        (185)           (11)
Noncontrolling interests                                                      223           157            152            66            42           5              4
Profit (loss) before tax                                                      816           544            468           272            50          76             16
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                        10             9             10             1            10          (0)            (5)
Assets under Management (in € bn)                                             928           793            768           135            17          25              3
Net flows (in € bn)                                                            48            30             25            17          N/M            5           N/M
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                            4,072         3,926          3,925           146             4           1              0
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.


Capital Release Unit
                                                                                                                   2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                  from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                     2021          2020          2019         in € m.        in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues                                                                    26         (225)          217            251          N/M         (442)          N/M
Provision for credit losses                                                    (42)          29           (14)           (70)         N/M           43           N/M
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                     128           168            359           (40)          (24)       (191)           (53)
General and administrative expenses                                         1,306         1,774          2,898          (468)          (26)     (1,124)           (39)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                              0             0              0             0          N/M            0           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                       (2)            5            143            (7)         N/M         (139)           (97)
Total noninterest expenses                                                  1,432         1,947          3,400          (515)          (26)     (1,453)           (43)
Noncontrolling interests                                                        –            (0)             1             0          N/M           (1)          N/M
Profit (loss) before tax                                                   (1,364)       (2,200)        (3,170)          836           (38)        970            (31)
Total assets (in € bn)1                                                       132           198            259           (66)          (33)        (62)           (24)
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                              267           478            614          (211)          (44)       (136)           (22)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Segment assets represent consolidated view, i.e., the amounts do not include intersegment balances.


Corporate & Other (C&O)
                                                                                                                   2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
                                                                                                                                  from 2020                  from 2019
in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                     2021          2020          2019         in € m.        in %       in € m.         in %
Net revenues                                                                 (339)         (534)          107            195           (36)       (641)          N/M
Provision for credit losses                                                     5            (4)           (0)             9          N/M           (3)          N/M
Noninterest expenses
Compensation and benefits                                                   3,012         3,217          3,406          (206)           (6)       (188)            (6)
General and administrative expenses                                        (2,008)       (2,652)        (2,916)          644           (24)        263             (9)
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                              0             0              0             0          N/M            0           N/M
Restructuring activities                                                       (0)            3             41            (3)         N/M          (38)           (93)
Total noninterest expenses                                                  1,004           568            531           436            77          37              7
Noncontrolling interests                                                     (206)         (169)          (173)          (37)           22           3             (2)
Profit (loss) before tax                                                   (1,143)         (929)          (251)         (213)           23        (679)          N/M
Employees (full-time equivalent)                                           30,064        29,587         30,672           477             2      (1,085)            (4)
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure




                                                                                                                                                                231
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Annual Report 2021                                                    04 – Business segments and related information




Entity-wide disclosures
The Group’s Entity-Wide Disclosures include net revenues from internal and external counterparties. Excluding revenues from
internal counterparties would require disproportionate IT investment and is not in line with the Bank's management approach.
For details of the net revenue components please see “Management Report: Operating and Financial Review: Results of
Operations: Corporate Divisions”.

The following table presents total net revenues (before provisions for credit losses) by geographic area for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The information presented for CB, IB, PB, AM and CRU has been classified
based primarily on the location of the Group’s office in which the revenues are recorded. The information for C&O is presented
on a global level only, as management responsibility for C&O is held centrally.

in € m.                                                                                                                             2021                 2020                 2019
Germany:
  Corporate Bank                                                                                                                  2,593                 2,538                2,444
  Investment Bank                                                                                                                   450                   431                  364
  Private Bank                                                                                                                    5,481                 5,456                5,562
  Asset Management                                                                                                                1,385                   992                1,054
  Capital Release Unit                                                                                                                4                    23                   80
Total Germany                                                                                                                     9,914                 9,441                9,504
UK:
  Corporate Bank                                                                                                                    144                   110                  207
  Investment Bank                                                                                                                 3,642                 3,552                2,244
  Private Bank                                                                                                                       (2)                   31                   29
  Asset Management                                                                                                                  336                   292                  345
  Capital Release Unit                                                                                                             (122)                 (383)                (181)
Total UK                                                                                                                          3,997                 3,602                2,645
Rest of Europe, Middle East and Africa:
  Corporate Bank                                                                                                                    900                   934                  846
  Investment Bank                                                                                                                   255                   358                  292
  Private Bank                                                                                                                    1,783                 1,682                1,676
  Asset Management                                                                                                                  286                   344                  380
  Capital Release Unit                                                                                                               26                    35                   99
Total Rest of Europe, Middle East and Africa                                                                                      3,249                 3,355                3,293
Americas (primarily United States):
  Corporate Bank                                                                                                                    750                   768                  951
  Investment Bank                                                                                                                 3,904                 3,285                2,701
  Private Bank                                                                                                                      364                   362                  379
  Asset Management                                                                                                                  537                   465                  437
  Capital Release Unit                                                                                                               41                    50                   88
Total Americas                                                                                                                    5,596                 4,929                4,556
Asia/Pacific:
  Corporate Bank                                                                                                                    764                  796                  798
  Investment Bank                                                                                                                 1,381                1,660                1,421
  Private Bank                                                                                                                      608                  594                  593
  Asset Management                                                                                                                  163                  136                  116
  Capital Release Unit                                                                                                               77                   49                  130
Total Asia/Pacific                                                                                                                2,993                3,236                3,059
Corporate and Other                                                                                                                (339)                (534)                 107
Consolidated net revenues1                                                                                                       25,410               24,028               23,165
1
    Consolidated net revenues comprise interest and similar income, interest expenses and total noninterest income (including net commission and fee income). Revenues are
    attributed to countries based on the location in which the Group’s booking office is located. The location of a transaction on the Group’s books is sometimes different from the
    location of the headquarters or other offices of a customer and different from the location of the Group’s personnel who entered into or facilitated the transaction. Where the
    Group records a transaction involving its staff and customers and other third parties in different locations frequently depends on other considerations, such as the nature of the
    transaction, regulatory considerations and transaction processing considerations.




                                                                                                                                                                              232
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                                                    05 – Net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit
                                                                      or loss




Notes to the consolidated income statement

05 – Net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial
assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
Net interest income
in € m.                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                2019
Interest and similar income:
   Interest income on cash and central bank balances                                                                              160                  321               1,762
   Interest income on interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                                                       67                  325                 293
   Central bank funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements                                                       273                  318                 340
   Loans                                                                                                                       10,477               11,439              13,760
   Other1                                                                                                                       1,747                  896                 824
   Total Interest and similar income from assets measured at amortized cost                                                    12,724               13,298              16,979
   Interest income on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                           501                  635               1,023
   Total interest and similar income calculated using the effective interest method                                            13,225               13,933              18,002
   Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss1                                                                       3,374                3,873               7,205
Total interest and similar income                                                                                              16,599               17,806              25,208
Thereof: negative interest expense on financial liabilities                                                                     1,217                  636                 372
Interest expense:
   Interest-bearing deposits                                                                                                    1,244                1,941               3,643
   Central bank funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements                                                   148                  169                 367
   Other short-term borrowings                                                                                                     71                   62                 163
   Long-term debt                                                                                                               1,484                1,612               2,002
   Trust preferred securities                                                                                                       3                   42                 187
   Other                                                                                                                          876                  807               1,667
   Total interest expense measured at amortized cost                                                                            3,825                4,633               8,030
   Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                                                   1,619                1,648               3,429
Total interest expense                                                                                                          5,444                6,280              11,458
Thereof: negative interest income on financial assets                                                                             786                  582                 743
Net interest income                                                                                                            11,155               11,526              13,749
1
    Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.


Other interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 included € 0 million, € 43 million, and
€ 93 million respectively, which were related to government grants under the Targeted Longer-term Refinancing Operations II
(TLTRO II)-program.


Impact of ECB Targeted Longer-term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO III)
The Governing Council of the ECB decided on a number of modifications to the terms and conditions of its Targeted Longer-
term Refinancing Operations III (TLTRO III)-refinancing program in order to support further the provision of credit to
households and firms in the face of the current economic disruption and heightened uncertainty caused by the COVID-19
pandemic.

The base interest rate under the TLTRO III-refinancing program is the average of the main refinancing operations rate with
the exception of the period from June 24, 2020 to June 23, 2022, when a discount of 50 basis points applies (“base rate
discount”). The applicable interest rate under the TLTRO III-refinancing program can further reduce by “new lending discounts”
that apply if certain net lending thresholds are met. Accordingly, banks whose eligible net lending exceeds 0 % between March
1, 2020 and March 31, 2021 pay a rate 0.5 % lower than the average deposit facility rate for borrowings between June 24,
2020 and June 23, 2021. The interest rate outside of the period from June 24, 2020 to June 23, 2021 will be the average
interest rate on the deposit facility (currently (0.5) %) with exception of the period from June 24, 2021 to June 23, 2022 when
banks pay a rate 0.5 % lower than the average deposit facility rate for borrowings provided their eligible net lending exceeds
0 % between October 1, 2020 and December 31, 2021.

As of December 31, 2021, the Group has borrowed € 44.7 billion (December 31, 2020: € 37.5 billion) under the TLTRO III-
refinancing program. The Group accounts for the base rate discount and the new lending discounts as a government grant
under IAS 20. The income from the government grant is included in other interest income. The Group recognizes the benefit
from the TLTRO III refinancing program in the period in which the grant is intended to compensate the Group for the related
borrowing costs if it has established reasonable assurance that it will meet the relevant lending thresholds. As of December
31, 2021 the Group met the requirements for recognition of the base rate discount and the new lending discounts for the
periods from June 24, 2020 to June 23, 2021 and from June 24, 2021 to June 23, 2022. As a result, for the year ended
December 31, 2021 the Group applied an all-in rate of (1) % which resulted in interest income recognition of € 494 million,


                                                                                                                                                                           233
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                                                   05 – Net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit
                                                                     or loss




including the impact of a catch up recognition of the more favorable incentive rate in respect of participation in H2 2020. In
contrast, for the year ended December 31, 2020 the Group did not establish reasonable assurance such that it applied the
base rate discount only which resulted in interest income of € 86 million.

Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss

in € m.                                                                                                                          2021                 2020                 2019
Trading Income:
  FIC Sales and Trading                                                                                                        2,780                3,457                2,563
  Other trading income (loss)                                                                                                   (921)              (1,228)              (2,366)
Total trading income (loss)                                                                                                    1,859                2,230                  197
Net gains (losses) on non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss:
Breakdown by financial assets category:
  Debt Securities                                                                                                                 95                    5                   72
  Equity Securities                                                                                                              812                  114                  271
  Loans and loan commitments                                                                                                      18                  (38)                  28
  Deposits                                                                                                                         2                   (9)                 (19)
  Others non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit and loss                                            180                  203                   25
Total net gains (losses) on non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or
                                                                                                                               1,106                  276                  377
loss:
Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss:
Breakdown by financial asset/liability category:
  Loans and loan commitments                                                                                                      11                   15                   (9)
  Deposits                                                                                                                         5                   (1)                  (0)
  Long-term debt                                                                                                                  48                  (71)                (386)
  Other financial assets/liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                                              15                   16                   15
Total net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                          79                  (40)                (381)
Total net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                  3,045                2,465                  193


Combined net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
in € m.                                                                                                                          2021                 2020                 2019
Net interest income                                                                                                           11,155               11,526               13,749
   Trading income (loss)1                                                                                                      1,859                2,230                  197
   Net gains (losses) on non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                           1,106                  276                  377
   Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                             79                  (40)                (381)
Total net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                  3,045                2,465                  193
Total net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value
through profit or loss2                                                                                                       14,200               13,991               13,942
   Corporate Treasury Services                                                                                                 1,814                2,073                1,757
   Institutional Client Services                                                                                                 326                  311                  405
   Business Banking                                                                                                              526                  555                  556
Corporate Bank                                                                                                                 2,666                2,939                2,718
   FIC Sales & Trading                                                                                                         6,917                6,991                5,696
   Remaining Products                                                                                                            (26)                 202                 (253)
Investment Bank                                                                                                                6,891                7,193                5,442
   Private Bank Germany                                                                                                        3,114                2,956                3,292
   International Private Bank                                                                                                  1,733                1,693                1,699
Private Bank                                                                                                                   4,847                4,648                4,991
Asset Management                                                                                                                 246                  (98)                  87
Capital Release Unit                                                                                                             (18)                 (33)                 155
Corporate & Other                                                                                                               (432)                (658)                 549
Total net interest income and net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value
through profit or loss                                                                                                        14,200               13,991               13,942
1
    Trading income (loss) includes gains and losses from derivatives not qualifying for hedge accounting.
2
    Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.


The Group’s trading and risk management businesses include significant activities in interest rate instruments and related
derivatives. Under IFRS, interest and similar income earned from trading instruments and financial instruments designated at
fair value through profit or loss (i.e., coupon and dividend income), and the costs of funding net trading positions, are part of
net interest income. The Group’s trading activities can periodically shift income to either net interest income or to net gains
(losses) of financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss depending on a variety of factors, including risk
management strategies. The above table combines net interest income and net gains (losses) of financial assets/liabilities at
fair value through profit or loss by business division.




                                                                                                                                                                          234
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                              06 – Commissions and fee income




06 – Commissions and fee income
in € m.                                                                                            2021          2020            2019
Commission and fee income and expense:
Commission and fee income                                                                        13,730        12,044          12,283
Commission and fee expense                                                                        2,796         2,620           2,763
Net commissions and fee income                                                                   10,934         9,424           9,520


Disaggregation of revenues by product type and business segment
                                                                                                                          Dec 31,2021
in € m.                      Corporate   Investment           Private            Asset            Capital   Corporate &           Total
(unless stated otherwise)        Bank          Bank             Bank        Management       Release Unit        Other    Consolidated
Major type of services:
Commissions for
administration                    231           27               259                 21                4            (2)           539
Commissions for assets
under management                   16            1               369              3,570               (0)            0          3,956
Commissions for other
securities                        423           (0)               43                   1               0             0            467
Underwriting and
advisory fees                      35        2,258                12                  0              (0)           (41)         2,264
Brokerage fees                     22          246             1,302                 96             118             (0)         1,784
Commissions for local
payments                          441            4               864                   0               0            10          1,320
Commissions for foreign
commercial business               456           23                95                   0              (0)           (2)           572
Commissions for foreign
currency/exchange
business                           11            0                  5                  0               0            (0)             16
Commissions for loan
processing and
guarantees                        564          279               305                   0               5             5          1,157
Intermediary fees                  12            3               617                   0               0            11            644
Fees for sundry other
customer services                 282          562                40                121                4             2          1,011
Total fee and
commissions income              2,494        3,403             3,910              3,809             132            (18)        13,730
Gross expense                                                                                                                  (2,796)
Net fees and
commissions                                                                                                                    10,934




                                                                                                                                 235
Deutsche Bank                                             Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                                        06 – Commissions and fee income




                                                                                                                                       Dec 31,2020
in € m.                          Corporate         Investment           Private            Asset            Capital   Corporate &              Total
(unless stated otherwise)            Bank                Bank             Bank        Management       Release Unit        Other       Consolidated
Major type of services:
Commissions for
administration                        245                 17               235                 23                1            (3)              518
Commissions for assets
under management                        19                 1               319              3,090               (0)            0             3,429
Commissions for other
securities                            365                  0                35                  0                0             0               401
Underwriting and
advisory fees                           29             1,688                13                  0               1            (42)            1,688
Brokerage fees                          21               357             1,103                 72             113             (1)            1,665
Commissions for local
payments                              436                 (2)              951                  (0)              0             8             1,394
Commissions for foreign
commercial business                   409                 25               104                  0                0            (3)              536
Commissions for foreign
currency/exchange
business                                 4                 0                  6                 0                0            (0)                11
Commissions for loan
processing and
guarantees                            529                210               305                  0                7             7             1,058
Intermediary fees                       9                  2               579                  1                1            12               604
Fees for sundry other
customer services                     276                289                39                131                4             1               741
Total fee and
commissions income                  2,344              2,588             3,689              3,317             127            (20)           12,044
Gross expense                                                                                                                               (2,620)
Net fees and
commissions                                                                                                                                  9,424
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure. Fee and commission income and gross expense have been restated by € 182 million
for 2020. The reclassifications did not affect net fee and commission income.

                                                                                                                                       Dec 31,2019
in € m.                          Corporate         Investment           Private            Asset            Capital   Corporate &              Total
(unless stated otherwise)            Bank                Bank             Bank        Management       Release Unit        Other       Consolidated
Major type of services:
Commissions for
administration                        251                  8               234                 23                5            (0)              521
Commissions for assets
under management                        22                 1               304              3,219                1             1             3,547
Commissions for other
securities                            330                 (0)               28                  1                1             0               359
Underwriting and
advisory fees                           29             1,568                15                  0              61            (17)            1,656
Brokerage fees                          13               253               930                 81             470              4             1,751
Commissions for local
payments                              497                  0               974                  (0)              1             2             1,474
Commissions for foreign
commercial business                   455                 26               106                  0                0            (1)              586
Commissions for foreign
currency/exchange
business                                 7                 0                  7                 0                0             0                 15
Commissions for loan
processing and
guarantees                            497                189               281                  0               16             5               989
Intermediary fees                      35                  2               486                  0                1            11               535
Fees for sundry other
customer services                     297                349                54                127               23             0               850
Total fee and
commissions income                  2,433              2,395             3,419              3,451             578              7            12,283
Gross expense                                                                                                                               (2,763)
Net fees and
commissions                                                                                                                                  9,520
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.


Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied. Performance obligation is satisfied by fund performance
exceeding a hurdle rate (an agreed minimum annual return provided to investors). As of December 31, 2021, there were
performance obligations to be satisfied of € 244 million with a time band of five years from 2023 to 2027 (as of December 31,
2020, € 66 million with a time band of seven years from 2022 to 2028) from alternative funds. The increase of the performance
obligations to be satisfied was mainly driven by additional fund expected to generate future performance fees.



                                                                                                                                              236
Deutsche Bank                                                          Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                                                     09 – General and administrative expenses




As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Group’s balance of receivables from commission and fee income was
€ 834 million and € 876 million respectively. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Group’s balance of
contract liabilities associated to commission and fee income was € 70 million and € 65 million, respectively. Contract liabilities
arise from the Group’s obligation to provide future services to a customer for which it has received consideration from the
customer prior to completion of the services. The balances of receivables and contract liabilities do not vary significantly from
period to period reflecting the fact that they predominately relate to recurring service contracts with service periods of less
than one year such as monthly current account services and quarterly asset management services. As a result, prior period
balances of contract liabilities are generally recognized in revenue in the subsequent period. Customer payment in exchange
for services provided are generally subject to performance by the Group over the specific service period such that the Group’s
right to payment arises at the end of the service period when its performance obligations are fully completed. Therefore, no
material balance of contract asset is reported.



07 – Net gains (losses) from derecognition of financial assets
measured at amortized cost
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Group sold financial assets measured at amortized cost of € 539 million
(December 31, 2020: € 10 billion and December 31, 2019: € 390 million). The sales in the comparative period related primarily
to a Hold to Collect (HTC) portfolio in Postbank as well as sales made from a HTC portfolio in Treasury. A decision was made
to divest the Postbank bond portfolio as part of the integration of Postbank into the Group. The Treasury sales were made as
part of a strategy realignment for managing the interest rate risk in the Banking Book. As a result of these sales, the HTC
business model is no longer valid for future acquisitions of assets in this portfolio.

The table below presents the gains and (losses) arising from derecognition of these securities.

in € m.                                                                                                                               2021                 2020¹                 2019¹
Gains                                                                                                                                   15                  344                      5
Losses                                                                                                                                 (15)                 (33)                    (2)
Net gains (losses) from derecognition of financial assets measured at amortized cost                                                     1                  311                      3
1
    Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.



08 – Other income (loss)
in € m.                                                                                                                               2021                 2020²                 2019²
Other income (loss):
Insurance premiums                                                                                                                       3                    3                      3
Net income (loss) from hedge relationships qualifying for hedge accounting                                                             124                 (306)                  (635)
Remaining other income (loss)1                                                                                                        (185)                 163                    (40)
Total other income (loss)                                                                                                              (58)                (141)                  (671)
1
    Includes net gains (losses) of € 10 million, € (59) million and € 4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, that are related to non-current
    assets and disposal groups held for sale.
2
    Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.



09 – General and administrative expenses
in € m.                                                                                                                               2021                  2020                  2019
General and administrative expenses:
Information Technology                                                                                                              4,321                3,862                   5,011
Occupancy, furniture and equipment expenses                                                                                         1,727                1,724                   1,693
Regulatory, Tax & Insurance1                                                                                                        1,395                1,407                   1,440
Professional services2                                                                                                                924                  977                   1,142
Banking Services and outsourced operations2                                                                                           946                  967                     969
Market Data and Research Services                                                                                                     347                  376                     421
Travel expenses                                                                                                                        46                   76                     256
Marketing expenses                                                                                                                    178                  174                     251
Other expenses3                                                                                                                       938                  697                   1,070
Total general and administrative expenses                                                                                          10,821               10,259                  12,253
1
    Includes bank levy of € 553 million in 2021, € 633 million in 2020 and € 622 million in 2019.
2
    Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.
3
    Includes litigation related expenses of € 466 million in 2021, € 158 million in 2020 and € 473 million in 2019. See Note 27 “Provisions”, for more details on litigation.




                                                                                                                                                                                 237
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                              10 – Restructuring




10 – Restructuring
Restructuring is primarily driven by the implementation of the Group’s strategic changes as announced in the third quarter
2019. We have defined and are in the process of implementing measures that aim to strengthen the bank, position it for growth
and simplify its organizational set-up. The measures also aim to reduce adjusted costs through higher efficiency, by optimizing
and streamlining processes, and by exploiting synergies.

Restructuring expense is comprised of termination benefits, additional expenses covering the acceleration of deferred
compensation awards not yet amortized due to the discontinuation of employment and contract termination costs related to
real estate.

Net restructuring expense by division
in € m.                                                                                       2021        2020           2019
Corporate Bank                                                                                 42           28            137
Investment Bank                                                                                47           14            169
Private Bank                                                                                  173          413            125
Asset Management                                                                                2           22             29
Capital Release Unit                                                                           (2)           5            143
Corporate & Other                                                                              (0)           3             41
Total Net Restructuring Charges                                                               261          485            644


Net restructuring by type
in € m.                                                                                       2021        2020           2019
Restructuring – Staff related                                                                 241          479            641
  thereof:
  Termination Benefits                                                                        224          441            476
  Retention Acceleration                                                                       16           36            156
  Social Security                                                                               1            1              9
Restructuring – Non Staff related                                                              21            6              2
Total Net Restructuring Charges                                                               261          485            644


Provisions for restructuring amounted to € 582 million, € 676 million and € 684 million as of December 31, 2021,
December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The majority of the current provisions for restructuring are expected
to be utilized in the next two years.

During 2021,1,362 full-time equivalent staff was reduced through restructuring (2020: 1,447 and 2019: 2,564).

Organizational changes
Full-time equivalent staff                                                                    2021        2020           2019
Corporate Bank                                                                                 228         303            138
Investment Bank                                                                                149         100            626
Private Bank                                                                                   776         630            731
Asset Management                                                                                10          48            136
Capital Release Unit                                                                            13          69            514
Infrastructure                                                                                 186         297            419
Total full-time equivalent staff                                                             1,362       1,447          2,564




                                                                                                                         238
Deutsche Bank                                          Notes to the consolidated income statement
Annual Report 2021                                     11 – Earnings per share




11 – Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share amounts are computed by dividing net income (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders by
the average number of common shares outstanding during the year. The average number of common shares outstanding is
defined as the average number of common shares issued, reduced by the average number of shares in treasury and by the
average number of shares that will be acquired under physically-settled forward purchase contracts, and increased by
undistributed vested shares awarded under deferred share plans.

Diluted earnings per share assumes the conversion into common shares of outstanding securities or other contracts to issue
common stock, such as share options, convertible debt, unvested deferred share awards and forward contracts. The
aforementioned instruments are only included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share if they are dilutive in the
respective reporting period.

Computation of basic and diluted earnings per share
in € m.                                                                                                2021      2020      2019
Net income (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders and additional equity components        2,365       495     (5,390)
Coupons paid on additional equity components                                                          (363)     (349)      (330)
Net income (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders –
numerator for basic earnings per share                                                               2,002       146     (5,719)
Effect of dilutive securities                                                                            0         0          0
Net income (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders after assumed
conversions – numerator for diluted earnings per share                                               2,002       146     (5,719)
Number of shares in million
Weighted-average shares outstanding – denominator for basic earnings per share                      2,096.5   2,108.2   2,110.0
Effect of dilutive securities:
  Forwards                                                                                             0.0       0.0        0.0
  Employee stock compensation options                                                                  0.0       0.0        0.0
  Deferred shares                                                                                     46.6      62.0        0.0
  Other (including trading options)                                                                    0.0       0.0        0.0
Dilutive potential common shares                                                                       0.0       0.0        0.0
Adjusted weighted-average shares after assumed conversions –
denominator for diluted earnings per share                                                          2,143.2   2,170.1   2,110.0



Earnings per share
in € m.                                                                                                2021      2020      2019
Basic earnings per share                                                                              0.96      0.07      (2.71)
Diluted earnings per share                                                                            0.93      0.07      (2.71)



Due to the net loss situation for 2019 potentially dilutive shares are generally not considered for the earnings per share
calculation, because to do so would have been anti-dilutive and hence decreased the net loss per share.

Instruments outstanding and not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share1
Number of shares in m.                                                                                 2021      2020      2019
Call options sold                                                                                       0.0       0.0      0.0
Employee stock compensation options                                                                     0.0       0.0      0.0
Deferred shares                                                                                         0.0       0.0    117.6




                                                                                                                          239
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                    12 – Financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss




Notes to the consolidated balance sheet

12 – Financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or
loss
in € m.                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Financial assets classified as held for trading:
  Trading assets:
    Trading securities                                                                                                                             92,536         97,756
    Other trading assets1                                                                                                                           9,860         10,173
  Total trading assets                                                                                                                            102,396        107,929
  Positive market values from derivative financial instruments                                                                                    299,732        343,455
Total financial assets classified as held for trading                                                                                             402,128        451,383
Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss:
  Securities purchased under resale agreements                                                                                                     59,931         46,057
  Securities borrowed                                                                                                                              18,355         17,009
  Loans                                                                                                                                               895          2,192
  Other financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                                                                             9,784         10,864
Total Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                                                                  88,965         76,121
Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss:
  Loans                                                                                                                                               139            437
  Other financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                0              0
Total financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                140            437
Total financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                       491,233        527,941
1
    Includes traded loans of € 9.2 billion and € 8.3 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively.


in € m.                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Financial liabilities classified as held for trading:
  Trading liabilities:
    Trading securities                                                                                                                             54,235         43,882
    Other trading liabilities                                                                                                                         483            434
  Total trading liabilities                                                                                                                        54,718         44,316
  Negative market values from derivative financial instruments                                                                                    287,108        327,775
Total financial liabilities classified as held for trading                                                                                        341,827        372,090
Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss:
  Securities sold under repurchase agreements                                                                                                      53,364         41,636
  Loan commitments                                                                                                                                      7              2
  Long-term debt                                                                                                                                    3,699          3,374
  Other financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                       1,397          1,570
Total financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                        58,468         46,582
Investment contract liabilities                                                                                                                       562            526
Total financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                  400,857        419,199


Financial assets & liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss
The Group has designated various lending relationships at fair value through profit or loss. Lending facilities consist of drawn
loan assets and undrawn irrevocable loan commitments. The maximum exposure to credit risk on a drawn loan is its fair value.
The Group’s maximum exposure to credit risk on drawn loans was € 139 million and € 437 million as of December 31, 2021,
and 2020, respectively. Exposure to credit risk also exists for undrawn irrevocable loan commitments and is predominantly
counterparty credit risk.

The credit risk on the securities purchased under resale agreements and securities borrowed designated under the fair value
option is mitigated by the holding of collateral. The valuation of these instruments takes into account the credit enhancement
in the form of the collateral received. As such there is no material movement during the year or cumulatively due to movements
in counterparty credit risk on these instruments.




                                                                                                                                                                    240
Deutsche Bank                                                              Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                         13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Changes in fair value of financial assets attributable to movements in counterparty credit risk
in € m.                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021           Dec 31, 2020
Notional value of financial assets exposed to credit risk                                                                                                            136                    439
Annual change in the fair value reflected in the Statement of Income                                                                                                   1                     (8)
Cumulative change in the fair value                                                                                                                                    0                     (8)
Notional of credit derivatives used to mitigate credit risk                                                                                                           98                    166
Annual change in the fair value reflected in the Statement of Income                                                                                                   0                      8
Cumulative change in the fair value                                                                                                                                    0                      8


Changes in fair value of financial liabilities attributable to movements in the Group’s credit risk 1
in € m.                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021           Dec 31, 2020
Presented in Other comprehensive Income
Cumulative change in the fair value                                                                                                                                     7                    (12)
Presented in Statement of income
Annual change in the fair value reflected in the Statement of Income                                                                                                    0                      0
Cumulative change in the fair value                                                                                                                                     0                      0
1
    The fair value of a financial liability incorporates the credit risk of that financial liability. Changes in the fair value of financial liabilities issued by consolidated structured entities
    have been excluded as this is not related to the Group’s credit risk but to that of the legally isolated structured entity, which is dependent on the collateral it holds.


Transfers of the cumulative gains or losses within equity during the period
in € m.                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021           Dec 31, 2020
Cumulative gains or losses within equity during the period                                                                                                              0                      0


Amounts realized on derecognition of liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss
in € m.                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021           Dec 31, 2020
Amount presented in other comprehensive income realized at derecognition                                                                                                0                      0


The excess of the contractual amount repayable at maturity over the carrying value of financial liabilities1
in € m.                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021           Dec 31, 2020
Including undrawn loan commitments²                                                                                                                                2,943                    963
Excluding undrawn loan commitments                                                                                                                                   607                    159
1
    Assuming the liability is extinguished at the earliest contractual maturity that the Group can be required to repay. When the amount payable is not fixed, it is determined by
    reference to conditions existing at the reporting date.
2
    The contractual cash flows at maturity for undrawn loan commitments assume full drawdown of the facility.




13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value
Valuation Methods and Control
The Group has an established valuation control framework which governs internal control standards, methodologies, and
procedures over the valuation process.

Prices Quoted in Active Markets – The fair value of instruments that are quoted in active markets are determined using the
quoted prices where they represent prices at which regularly and recently occurring transactions take place.

Valuation Techniques – The Group uses valuation techniques to establish the fair value of instruments where prices, quoted
in active markets, are not available. Valuation techniques used for financial instruments include modelling techniques, the use
of indicative quotes for proxy instruments, quotes from recent and less regular transactions and broker quotes.

For some financial instruments a rate or other parameter, rather than a price, is quoted. Where this is the case then the market
rate or parameter is used as an input to a valuation model to determine fair value. For some instruments, modelling techniques
follow industry standard models, for example, discounted cash flow analysis and standard option pricing models. These
models are dependent upon estimated future cash flows, discount factors and volatility levels. For more complex or unique
instruments, more sophisticated modelling techniques are required, and may rely upon assumptions or more complex
parameters such as correlations, prepayment speeds, default rates and loss severity.

Frequently, valuation models require multiple parameter inputs. Where possible, parameter inputs are based on observable
data or are derived from the prices of relevant instruments traded in active markets. Where observable data is not available
for parameter inputs, then other market information is considered. For example, indicative broker quotes and consensus
pricing information are used to support parameter inputs where they are available. Where no observable information is
available to support parameter inputs then they are based on other relevant sources of information such as prices for similar
transactions, historic data, economic fundamentals, and research information, with appropriate adjustment to reflect the terms
of the actual instrument being valued and current market conditions.




                                                                                                                                                                                           241
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                 13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Valuation Adjustments – Valuation adjustments are an integral part of the valuation process. In making appropriate valuation
adjustments, the Group follows methodologies that consider factors such as bid-offer spreads, counterparty/own credit and
funding risk. Bid-offer spread valuation adjustments are required to adjust mid-market valuations to the appropriate bid or offer
valuation. The bid or offer valuation is the best representation of the fair value for an instrument, and therefore its fair value.
The carrying value of a long position is adjusted from mid to bid, and the carrying value of a short position is adjusted from
mid to offer. Bid-offer valuation adjustments are determined from bid-offer prices observed in relevant trading activity and in
quotes from other broker-dealers or other knowledgeable counterparties. Where the quoted price for the instrument is already
a bid-offer price then no additional bid-offer valuation adjustment is necessary. Where the fair value of financial instruments is
derived from a modelling technique, then the parameter inputs into that model are normally at a mid-market level. Such
instruments are generally managed on a portfolio basis and, when specified criteria are met, valuation adjustments are taken
to reflect the cost of closing out the net exposure the Bank has to individual market or counterparty risks. These adjustments
are determined from bid-offer prices observed in relevant trading activity and quotes from other broker-dealers.

Where complex valuation models are used, or where less-liquid positions are being valued, then bid-offer levels for those
positions may not be available directly from the market, and therefore for the close-out cost of these positions, models and
parameters must be estimated. When these adjustments are designed, the Group closely examines the valuation risks
associated with the model as well as the positions themselves, and the resulting adjustments are closely monitored on an
ongoing basis.

Counterparty Credit Valuation Adjustments (CVAs) are required to cover expected credit losses to the extent that the valuation
technique does not already include an expected credit loss factor relating to the non-performance risk of the counterparty. The
CVA amount is applied to all relevant over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, and is determined by assessing the potential credit
exposure to a given counterparty and taking into account any collateral held, the effect of any relevant netting arrangements,
expected loss given default and the probability of default, based on available market information, including Credit Default
Swap (CDS) spreads. Where counterparty CDS spreads are not available, relevant proxies are used.

The fair value of the Group’s financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss (i.e., OTC derivative liabilities an d issued
note liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss) incorporates valuation adjustments to measure the change in the
Group’s own credit risk (i.e. Debt Valuation Adjustments (DVA) for Derivatives and Own Credit Adjustment (OCA) for structured
notes). For derivative liabilities the Group considers its own creditworthiness by assessing all counterparties’ expected future
exposure to the Group, taking into account any collateral posted by the Group, the effect of relevant netting arrangements,
the probability of default of the Group, based on the Group’s market CDS level and the expected loss given default, taking
into account the seniority of derivative claims under resolution (statutory subordination). Issued note liabilities are discounted
utilizing the spread at which similar instruments would be issued or bought back at the measurement date as this reflects the
value from the perspective of a market participant who holds the identical item as an asset. This spread is further
parameterized into a market level of funding component and an idiosyncratic own credit component. Under IFRS 9 the change
in the own credit component is reported under Other Comprehensive Income (OCI).

When determining CVA and DVA, additional adjustments are made where appropriate to achieve fair value, due to the
expected loss estimate of a particular arrangement, or where the credit risk being assessed differs in nature to that described
by the available CDS instrument.

Funding Valuation Adjustments (FVA) are required to incorporate the market implied funding costs into the fair value of
derivative positions. The FVA reflects a discounting spread applied to uncollateralized and partially collateralized derivatives
and is determined by assessing the market-implied funding costs on both assets and liabilities.

Where there is uncertainty in the assumptions used within a modelling technique, an additional adjustment is taken to calibrate
the model price to the expected market price of the financial instrument. Typically, such transactions have bid-offer levels
which are less observable, and these adjustments aim to estimate the bid-offer by computing the liquidity-premium associated
with the transaction. Where a financial instrument is of sufficient complexity that the cost of closing it out would be higher than
the cost of closing out its component risks, then an additional adjustment is taken to reflect this.

IFRS requires the Group to use the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability. Where
relevant, these assumptions may include assumptions about climate change. The Group has not made material adjustment
to fair value for climate change beyond that already priced into market inputs.

Valuation Control – The Group has an independent specialized valuation control group within the Risk function which governs
and develops the valuation control framework and manages the valuation control processes. The mandate of this specialist
function includes the performance of the independent valuation control process for all businesses, the continued development
of valuation control methodologies and techniques, as well as devising and governing the formal valuation control policy
framework. Special attention of this independent valuation control group is directed to areas where management judgment
forms part of the valuation process.




                                                                                                                               242
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                               13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Results of the valuation control process are collected and analyzed as part of a standard monthly reporting cycle. Variances
of differences outside of preset and approved tolerance levels are escalated both within the Finance function and with Senior
Business Management for review, resolution and, if required, adjustment.

For instruments where fair value is determined from valuation models, the assumptions and techniques used within the models
are independently validated by an independent specialist model validation group that is part of the Group’s Risk Management
function.

Quotes for transactions and parameter inputs are obtained from a number of third party sources including exchanges, pricing
service providers, firm broker quotes and consensus pricing services. Price sources are examined and assessed to determine
the quality of fair value information they represent, with greater emphasis given to those possessing greater valuation certainty
and relevance. The results are compared against actual transactions in the market to ensure the model valuations are
calibrated to market prices.

Price and parameter inputs to models, assumptions and valuation adjustments are verified against independent sources.
Where they cannot be verified to independent sources due to lack of observable information, the estimate of fair value is
subject to procedures to assess its reasonableness. Such procedures include performing revaluation using independently
generated models (including where existing models are independently recalibrated), assessing the valuations against
appropriate proxy instruments and other benchmarks, and performing extrapolation techniques. Assessment is made as to
whether the valuation techniques produce fair value estimates that are reflective of market levels by calibrating the results of
the valuation models against market transactions where possible.


Fair Value Hierarchy
The financial instruments carried at fair value have been categorized under the three levels of the IFRS fair value hierarchy
as follows:

Level 1 – Instruments valued using quoted prices in active markets are instruments where the fair value can be determined
directly from prices which are quoted in active, liquid markets and where the instrument observed in the market is
representative of that being priced in the Group’s inventory.

These include: government bonds, exchange-traded derivatives and equity securities traded on active, liquid exchanges.

Level 2 – Instruments valued with valuation techniques using observable market data are instruments where the fair value
can be determined by reference to similar instruments trading in active markets, or where a technique is used to derive the
valuation but where all inputs to that technique are observable.

These include: many OTC derivatives; many investment-grade listed credit bonds; some CDS; many collateralized debt
obligations (CDO); and many less-liquid equities.

Level 3 – Instruments valued using valuation techniques using market data which is not directly observable are instruments
where the fair value cannot be determined directly by reference to market-observable information, and some other pricing
technique must be employed. Instruments classified in this category have an element which is unobservable and which has a
significant impact on the fair value.

These include: more-complex OTC derivatives; distressed debt; highly-structured bonds; illiquid asset-backed securities
(ABS); illiquid CDO’s (cash and synthetic); some private equity placements; many commercial real estate (CRE) loans; illiquid
loans; and some municipal bonds.




                                                                                                                           243
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                    13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Carrying value of the financial instruments held at fair value1
                                                                                                         Dec 31, 2021                                                 Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                         Valuation           Valuation                                Valuation           Valuation
                                                                        Quoted          technique           technique               Quoted           technique           technique
                                                                       prices in       observable        unobservable              prices in        observable        unobservable
                                                                 active market         parameters          parameters        active market          parameters          parameters
in € m.                                                               (Level 1)          (Level 2)           (Level 3)            (Level 1)           (Level 2)           (Level 3)
Financial assets held at fair value:
  Trading assets                                                      51,020              42,561                8,815             44,525               55,220               8,183
    Trading securities                                                50,814              38,108                3,614             44,349               50,340               3,066
    Other trading assets                                                 206               4,453                5,201                176                4,880               5,117
  Positive market values from derivative financial
  instruments                                                           4,347            286,343                9,042               4,208            330,522                8,725
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair
  value through profit or loss                                          2,764             81,304                4,896               2,992              68,511               4,618
  Financial assets designated at fair value
  through profit or loss                                                     0                 91                  49                    0                436                     0
  Financial assets at fair value through other
  comprehensive income                                                13,375              13,302               2,302              28,057              25,741                2,037
  Other financial assets at fair value                                   105                 9222                 78                  93               9,2772                  20
Total financial assets held at fair value                             71,611             424,524              25,182              79,875             489,707               23,583

Financial liabilities held at fair value:
  Trading liabilities                                                 48,364                6,272                  83             36,699                7,615                     2
     Trading securities                                               48,363                5,838                  33             36,674                7,206                     2
     Other trading liabilities                                             0                  434                  49                 25                  409                     0
  Negative market values from derivative
  financial instruments                                                 5,208            272,120                9,781               4,430            315,145                8,200
  Financial liabilities designated at fair value
  through profit or loss                                                   0              56,728               1,740                   0              45,622                  960
  Investment contract liabilities                                          0                 562                   0                   0                 526                    0
  Other financial liabilities at fair value                                5               3,0262               (179)3               799               3,5732                (294)3
Total financial liabilities held at fair value                        53,576             338,707              11,424              41,929             372,480                8,867
1
    Amounts in this table are generally presented on a gross basis, in line with the Group’s accounting policy regarding offsetting of financial instruments, as described in Note 1
    “Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates”.
2
    Predominantly relates to derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting.
3
    Relates to derivatives which are embedded in contracts where the host contract is held at amortized cost but for which the embedded derivative is separated. The separated
    embedded derivatives may have a positive or a negative fair value but have been presented in this table to be consistent with the classification of the host contract. The
    separated embedded derivatives are held at fair value on a recurring basis and have been split between the fair value hierarchy classifications.


During the first quarter of 2021, the Group implemented a refinement to its levelling methodology with the effect that for certain
trades where trade date profit was deferred, the fair value hierarchy classification is now based on current conditions rather
than conditions that existed at the trade date. The impact of these changes was a movement from Level 3 to Level 2 of
approximately € 1 billion of Positive market values from derivative financial instruments and € 200 million of Negative market
values from derivative financial instruments.

During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Group implemented a refinement to its levelling methodology for certain loan portfolios
to provide more reliable information. The change resulted in increase of Level 3 for “Other trading assets” and “Non-trading
financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss” by approximately € 2.0 billion.

The 2020 comparatives have not been restated for these refinements to levelling methodologies as these are changes in
accounting estimates.

Until December 31, 2021 there were transfers from Level 2 to Level 1 on trading securities (€ 5 billion of assets). The
assessment of level 1 versus level 2 is based on liquidity testing procedures.


Valuation Techniques
The Group has an established valuation control framework which governs internal control standards, methodologies, valuation
techniques and procedures over the valuation process and fair value measurement. The following is an explanation of the
valuation techniques used in establishing the fair value of the different types of financial instruments that the Group trades.

Sovereign, Quasi-sovereign and Corporate Debt and Equity Securities – Where there are no recent transactions then fair
value may be determined from the last market price adjusted for all changes in risks and information since that date. Where a
close proxy instrument is quoted in an active market then fair value is determined by adjusting the proxy value for differences
in the risk profile of the instruments. Where close proxies are not available then fair value is estimated using more complex
modelling techniques. These techniques include discounted cash flow models using current market rates for credit, interest,
liquidity and other risks. For equity securities modeling techniques may also include those based on earnings multiples.




                                                                                                                                                                              244
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                 13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Mortgage- and Other Asset-Backed Securities (MBS/ABS) include residential and commercial MBS and other ABS including
CDOs. ABS have specific characteristics as they have different underlying assets and the issuing entities have different capital
structures. The complexity increases further where the underlying assets are themselves ABS, as is the case with many of
the CDO instruments.

Where no reliable external pricing is available, ABS are valued, where applicable, using either relative value analysis which is
performed based on similar transactions observable in the market, or industry-standard valuation models making largest
possible use of available observable inputs. The industry standard models calculate principal and interest payments for a
given deal based on assumptions that can be independently price tested. The inputs include prepayment speeds, loss
assumptions (timing and severity) and a discount rate (spread, yield or discount margin). These inputs/assumptions are
derived from actual transactions, external market research and market indices where appropriate.

Loans – For certain loans fair value may be determined from the market price on a recently occurring transaction adjusted for
all changes in risks and information since that transaction date. Where there are no recent market transactions then broker
quotes, consensus pricing, proxy instruments or discounted cash flow models are used to determine fair value. Discounted
cash flow models incorporate parameter inputs for credit risk, interest rate risk, foreign exchange risk, loss given default
estimates and amounts utilized given default, as appropriate. Credit risk, loss given default and utilization given default
parameters are determined using information from the loan or other credit markets, where available and appropriate.

Leveraged loans can have transaction-specific characteristics which can limit the relevance of market-observed transactions.
Where similar transactions exist for which observable quotes are available from external pricing services then this information
is used with appropriate adjustments to reflect the transaction differences. When no similar transactions exist, a discounted
cash flow valuation technique is used with credit spreads derived from the appropriate leveraged loan index, incorporating the
industry classification, subordination of the loan, and any other relevant information on the loan and loan counterparty.

Over-The-Counter Derivative Financial Instruments – Market standard transactions in liquid trading markets, such as interest
rate swaps, foreign exchange forward and option contracts in G7 currencies, and equity swap and option contracts on listed
securities or indices are valued using market standard models and quoted parameter inputs. Parameter inputs are obtained
from pricing services, consensus pricing services and recently occurring transactions in active markets wherever possible.

More complex instruments are modeled using more sophisticated modeling techniques specific for the instrument and are
calibrated to available market prices. Where the model output value does not calibrate to a relevant market reference then
valuation adjustments are made to the model output value to adjust for any difference. In less active markets, data is obtained
from less frequent market transactions, broker quotes and through extrapolation and interpolation techniques. Where
observable prices or inputs are not available, management judgment is required to determine fair values by assessing other
relevant sources of information such as historical data, fundamental analysis of the economics of the transaction and proxy
information from similar transactions.

Financial Liabilities Designated at Fair Value through Profit or Loss under the Fair Value Option – The fair value of financial
liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss under the fair value option incorporates all market risk factors including
a measure of the Group’s credit risk relevant for that financial liability. The financial liabilities include structured note issuances,
structured deposits, and other structured securities issued by consolidated vehicles, which may not be quoted in an active
market. The fair value of these financial liabilities is determined by discounting the contractual cash flows using the relevant
credit-adjusted yield curve. The market risk parameters are valued consistently to similar instruments held as assets, for
example, any derivatives embedded within the structured notes are valued using the same methodology discussed in the
“Over-The-Counter Derivative Financial Instruments” section above.

Where the financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss under the fair value option are collateralized, such
as securities loaned and securities sold under repurchase agreements, the credit enhancement is factored into the fair
valuation of the liability.

Investment Contract Liabilities – Assets which are linked to the investment contract liabilities are owned by the Group. The
investment contract obliges the Group to use these assets to settle these liabilities. Therefore, the fair value of investment
contract liabilities is determined by the fair value of the underlying assets (i.e., amount payable on surrender of the policies).




                                                                                                                                 245
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                               13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Analysis of Financial Instruments with Fair Value Derived from Valuation
Techniques Containing Significant Unobservable Parameters (Level 3)
Some of the financial assets and financial liabilities in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy have identical or similar offsetting
exposures to the unobservable input. However, according to IFRS they are required to be presented gross.

Trading Securities – Certain illiquid emerging market corporate bonds and illiquid highly structured corporate bonds are
included in this level of the hierarchy. In addition, some of the holdings of notes issued by securitization entities, commercial
and residential MBS, collateralized debt obligation securities and other ABS are reported here. The increase during the year
was mainly due to purchases and net transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 due to changes in the observability of input
parameters used to value these instruments, partially offset by sales, settlements, losses, deconsolidation.

Positive and Negative Market Values from Derivative Instruments categorized in this level of the fair value hierarchy are valued
based on one or more significant unobservable parameters. The unobservable parameters may include certain correlations,
certain longer-term volatilities, certain prepayment rates, credit spreads and other transaction-specific parameters.

Level 3 derivatives include certain options where the volatility is unobservable; certain basket options in which the correlations
between the referenced underlying assets are unobservable; longer-term interest rate option derivatives; multi-currency
foreign exchange derivatives; and certain credit default swaps for which the credit spread is not observable.

The increase in assets during the year are driven by gains and transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 due to changes in the
observability of input parameters used to value these instruments, partially offset by settlements. The increase in liabilities
during the year are driven by losses and transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 due to changes in the observability of input
parameters used to value these instruments, partially offset by settlement.

Other Trading Instruments classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy mainly consist of traded loans valued using valuation
models based on one or more significant unobservable parameters. Level 3 loans comprise illiquid leveraged loans and illiquid
residential and commercial mortgage loans. The increase during the year refers to purchases, issuances, gains and transfers
between Level 2 and Level 3 due to changes in the observability of input parameters used to value these instruments, partially
offset by sales and settlements.

Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss classified in Level 3 of fair value hierarchy consist
of any non-trading financial asset that does not fall into the Hold to Collect nor Hold to Collect and Sell business models. This
includes predominately reverse repurchase agreements which are managed on a fair value basis. Additionally, any financial
asset that falls into the Hold to Collect or Hold to Collect and Sell business models for which the contractual cash flow
characteristics are not SPPI. The increase during the year refers to purchases, issuances, gains and transfers between Level
2 and Level 3 due to changes in the observability of input parameters used to value these instruments, partially offset by sales
and settlements.

Financial Assets/Liabilities designated at Fair Value through Profit or Loss – Certain corporate loans and structured liabilities
which were designated at fair value through profit or loss under the fair value option were categorized in this level of the fair
value hierarchy. The corporate loans are valued using valuation techniques which incorporate observable credit spreads,
recovery rates and unobservable utilization parameters. Revolving loan facilities are reported in the third level of the hierarchy
because the utilization in the event of the default parameter is significant and unobservable.

In addition, certain hybrid debt issuances designated at fair value through profit or loss containing embedded derivatives are
valued based on significant unobservable parameters. These unobservable parameters include single stock volatility
correlations. The increase in assets during the year is driven by issuances. The increase in liabilities during the year is driven
by issuances, losses and net transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 due to changes in the observability of input parameters
used to value these instruments, partially offset by settlements.

Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income include non-performing loan portfolios where there is no
trading intent and the market is very illiquid. The increase during the year is driven by purchases, issuances, gains and
transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 due to changes in the observability of input parameters used to value these instruments
partially offset by sales and settlements.




                                                                                                                            246
Deutsche Bank                                                            Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                       13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Reconciliation of financial instruments classified in Level 3
Reconciliation of financial instruments classified in Level 3
                                                                                                                                                                               Dec 31, 2021
                                                      Changes
                                                         in the
                                                      group of
                                      Balance,         consoli-           Total                                                                   Transfers       Transfers        Balance,
                                     beginning           dated           gains/                                         Issu-         Settle-          into          out of          end of
in € m.                                of year      companies          losses1     Purchases            Sales         ances2          ments3       Level 34        Level 34            year
Financial assets held at
fair value:
Trading securities                      3,066               (2)          (263)         3,183         (2,445)               0           (106)           766            (585)         3,614
Positive market values
from derivative financial
instruments                             8,725                0            890              0              0               0           (727)          2,938          (2,783)         9,042
Other trading assets                    5,117                0            237            500         (2,194)          2,868         (1,635)            714            (406)         5,201
Non-trading financial
assets mandatory at fair
value through profit or
loss                                    4,618                0            425            493            (288)           243            (733)         1,064            (926)         4,896
Financial assets
designated at fair value
through profit or loss                        0              0              (0)             0               0             48               0              0               0             49
Financial assets at fair
value through other
comprehensive income                    2,037                0             615             53           (150)           662            (560)           350            (150)         2,302
Other financial assets at
fair value                                  20               0               2              0               0              0            (17)              0             74              78
Total financial assets held
at fair value                          23,583               (2)        1,3516,7        4,229         (5,076)          3,821         (3,777)          5,831          (4,777)        25,182
Financial liabilities held
at fair value:
Trading securities                            2              0               0              0               0              0              (0)            33              (2)            33
Negative market values
from derivative financial
instruments                             8,200                0            509               0               0              0           (367)         3,059          (1,620)         9,781
Other trading liabilities                   0                0            (15)              0               0              0              0             64               0             49
Financial liabilities
designated at fair value
through profit or loss                     960               0            911               0               0             96           (314)           198            (112)         1,740
Other financial liabilities
at fair value                             (294)              0            (12)              0               0              0             33              13             81           (179)
Total financial liabilities
held at fair value                      8,867                0         1,3936,7             0               0             96           (647)         3,367          (1,652)        11,424
1
    Total gains and losses predominantly relate to net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss reported in the consolidated statement of
    income. The balance also includes net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income reported in the consolidated statement of income
    and unrealized net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and exchange rate changes reported in other comprehensive income,
    net of tax. Further, certain instruments are hedged with instruments in level 1 or level 2 but the table above does not include the gains and losses on these hedging
    instruments. Additionally, both observable and unobservable parameters may be used to determine the fair value of an instrument classified within level 3 of the fair value
    hierarchy; the gains and losses presented below are attributable to movements in both the observable and unobservable parameters.
2
    Issuances relate to the cash amount received on the issuance of a liability and the cash amount paid on the primary issuance of a loan to a borrower.
3
    Settlements represent cash flows to settle the asset or liability. For debt and loan instruments this includes principal on maturity, principal amortizations and principal
    repayments. For derivatives all cash flows are presented in settlements.
4
    Transfers in and transfers out of Level 3 are related to changes in observability of input parameters. During the year they are recorded at their fair value at the beginning of
    year. For instruments transferred into Level 3 the table shows the gains and losses and cash flows on the instruments as if they had been transferred at the beginning of the
    year. Similarly, for instruments transferred out of Level 3 the table does not show any gains or losses or cash flows on the instruments during the year since the table is
    presented as if they have been transferred out at the beginning of the year.
5
    Total gains and losses on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income include a loss of € 13 million recognized in other comprehensive income, net of
    tax.
6
    This amount includes the effect of exchange rate changes. For total financial assets held at fair value this effect is a gain of € 447 million and for total financial liabilities held at
    fair value this is a loss of € 44 million.
7
    For assets positive balances represent gains, negative balances represent losses. For liabilities positive balances represent losses, negative balances represent gains.




                                                                                                                                                                                     247
Deutsche Bank                                                             Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                        13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




                                                                                                                                                                               Dec 31, 2020
                                                      Changes
                                                         in the
                                                      group of
                                      Balance,         consoli-           Total                                                                    Transfers      Transfers        Balance,
                                     beginning           dated           gains/                                         Issu-         Settle-           into         out of          end of
in € m.                                of year      companies          losses1     Purchases            Sales         ances2          ments3        Level 34       Level 34            year
Financial assets held at
fair value:
Trading securities                      3,430              (79)          (101)         2,134          (1,628)             11           (423)           333            (612)         3,066
Positive market values
from derivative financial
instruments                             8,167               (1)        1,422               0               0              0            (833)         1,541          (1,572)         8,725
Other trading assets                    6,137                0          (423)          1,188          (2,712)         1,855          (1,207)           710            (433)         5,117
Non-trading financial
assets mandatory at fair
value through profit or
loss                                    5,278                0           (256)           389            (394)           347            (811)           852            (786)         4,618
Financial assets
designated at fair value
through profit or loss                        7              0              (1)             0               0               6            (12)              0              0               0
Financial assets at fair
value through other
comprehensive income                    1,050                0            (66)5          127              (50)          718            (182)           618            (177)         2,037
Other financial assets at
fair value                                 363               0              (9)             0               0               0              4           (147)          (191)             20
Total financial assets held
at fair value                          24,431              (79)           5676,7       3,839          (4,784)         2,937          (3,463)         3,906          (3,771)        23,583
Financial liabilities held at
fair value:
Trading securities                            2              0              (2)             0               0               0              1               0             (0)              2
Negative market values
from derivative financial
instruments                             6,652                0         2,108                0               0               0          (365)         1,420          (1,615)         8,200
Other trading liabilities                  38                0            (1)               0               0               0            (9)             0             (28)             0
Financial liabilities
designated at fair value
through profit or loss                  1,954                0             55               0               0           186            (763)           215            (687)            960
Other financial liabilities
at fair value                              (34)              0             26               0               0               0            (16)          (187)            (83)          (294)
Total financial liabilities
held at fair value                      8,612                0         2,1856,7             0               0           186          (1,151)         1,448          (2,413)         8,867
1
    Total gains and losses predominantly relate to net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit or loss reported in the consolidated statement of
    income. The balance also includes net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income reported in the consolidated statement of income
    and unrealized net gains (losses) on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and exchange rate changes reported in other comprehensive income,
    net of tax. Further, certain instruments are hedged with instruments in level 1 or level 2 but the table above does not include the gains and losses on these hedging
    instruments. Additionally, both observable and unobservable parameters may be used to determine the fair value of an instrument classified within level 3 of the fair value
    hierarchy; the gains and losses presented below are attributable to movements in both the observable and unobservable parameters.
2
    Issuances relate to the cash amount received on the issuance of a liability and the cash amount paid on the primary issuance of a loan to a borrower.
3
    Settlements represent cash flows to settle the asset or liability. For debt and loan instruments this includes principal on maturity, principal amortizations and principal
    repayments. For derivatives all cash flows are presented in settlements.
4
    Transfers in and transfers out of Level 3 are related to changes in observability of input parameters. During the year they are recorded at their fair value at the beginning of
    year. For instruments transferred into Level 3 the table shows the gains and losses and cash flows on the instruments as if they had been transferred at the beginning of the
    year. Similarly, for instruments transferred out of Level 3 the table does not show any gains or losses or cash flows on the instruments during the year since the table is
    presented as if they have been transferred out at the beginning of the year.
5
    Total gains and losses on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income include a gain of € 11 million recognized in other comprehensive income, net of
    tax.
6
    This amount includes the effect of exchange rate changes. For total financial assets held at fair value this effect is a loss of € 495 million and for total financial liabilities held at
    fair value this is a gain of € 66 million.
7
    For assets positive balances represent gains, negative balances represent losses. For liabilities positive balances represent losses, negative balances represent gains.



Sensitivity Analysis of Unobservable Parameters
Where the value of financial instruments is dependent on unobservable parameter inputs, the precise level for these
parameters at the balance sheet date might be drawn from a range of reasonably possible alternatives. In preparing the
financial statements, appropriate levels for these unobservable input parameters are chosen so that they are consistent with
prevailing market evidence and in line with the Group’s approach to valuation control detailed above. Were the Group to have
marked the financial instruments concerned using parameter values drawn from the extremes of the ranges of reasonably
possible alternatives then as of December 31, 2021 it could have increased fair value by as much as € 1.7 billion or decreased
fair value by as much as € 1.2 billion. As of December 31, 2020 it could have increased fair value by as much as € 1.8 billion
or decreased fair value by as much as € 1.4 billion.




                                                                                                                                                                                      248
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




The changes in sensitive amounts from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 were a reduction in positive fair value
movement of € 90 million, and a reduction in negative fair value movement of € 152 million. In the same period there has been
a €1.6 billion increase in Group level 3 assets and a € 2.6 billion increase in Group level 3 liabilities. Sensitivity related to the
level 3 assets and liabilities has reduced throughout 2021 despite the level 3 increases reported in the same period due to a
range of idiosyncratic factors, resulting in the net impact of reductions in certain level 3 exposures on items which are deemed
to be more sensitive to unobservable input parameters outweighing the impact of increases in level 3 exposures as these
increases have been on items deemed to be less sensitive to unobservable input parameters.

Our sensitivity calculation of unobservable parameters for Level 3 aligns to the approach used to assess valuation uncertainty
for Prudent Valuation purposes. Prudent Valuation is a capital requirement for assets held at fair value. It provides a
mechanism for quantifying and capitalizing valuation uncertainty in accordance with the European Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2016/101, which supplements Article 34 of Regulation (EU) No. 2019/876 (CRR), requiring institutions to
apply as a deduction from CET 1 for the amount of any additional valuation adjustments on all assets measured at fair value
calculated in accordance with Article 105 (14). This utilizes exit price analysis performed for the relevant assets and liabilities
in the Prudent Valuation assessment. The downside sensitivity may be limited in some cases where the fair value is already
demonstrably prudent.

This disclosure is intended to illustrate the potential impact of the relative uncertainty in the fair value of financial instruments
for which valuation is dependent on unobservable input parameters. However, it is unlikely in practice that all unobservable
parameters would be simultaneously at the extremes of their ranges of reasonably possible alternatives. Hence, the estimates
disclosed above are likely to be greater than the true uncertainty in fair value at the balance sheet date. Furthermore, the
disclosure is neither predictive nor indicative of future movements in fair value.

For many of the financial instruments considered here, in particular derivatives, unobservable input parameters represent only
a subset of the parameters required to price the financial instrument, the remainder being observable. Hence for these
instruments the overall impact of moving the unobservable input parameters to the extremes of their ranges might be relatively
small compared with the total fair value of the financial instrument. For other instruments, fair value is determined based on
the price of the entire instrument, for example, by adjusting the fair value of a reasonable proxy instrument. In addition, all
financial instruments are already carried at fair values which are inclusive of valuation adjustments for the cost to close o ut
that instrument and hence already factor in uncertainty as it reflects itself in market pricing. Any negative impact of uncertainty
calculated within this disclosure, then, will be over and above that already included in the fair value contained in the financial
statements.

Breakdown of the sensitivity analysis by type of instrument 1
                                                                                                               Dec 31, 2021                                      Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                 Positive fair value     Negative fair value       Positive fair value     Negative fair value
                                                                                   movement from            movement from            movement from            movement from
                                                                                  using reasonable         using reasonable         using reasonable         using reasonable
in € m.                                                                        possible alternatives    possible alternatives    possible alternatives    possible alternatives
Securities:
  Debt securities                                                                              267                      256                      287                      2012
     Commercial mortgage-backed securities                                                      18                       15                        9                       22
     Mortgage and other asset-backed securities                                                 13                        9                       20                       12
     Corporate, sovereign and other debt securities                                            236                      233                      259                      1672
  Equity securities                                                                             94                       65                       83                       572
Derivatives:
  Credit                                                                                       163                      109                      283                      185
  Equity                                                                                       105                      100                      257                      238
  Interest related                                                                             409                      232                      306                      266
  Foreign Exchange                                                                              34                       31                       37                       32
  Other                                                                                         98                       82                       93                       82
Loans:
  Loans                                                                                        570                      340                      483                      306
Other                                                                                            0                        0                        0                        0
Total                                                                                        1,739                    1,215                    1,829                    1,367
1
    Where the exposure to an unobservable parameter is offset across different instruments then only the net impact is disclosed in the table.
2
    Reassessment of trades have resulted a reclassification in Positive and Negative fair value movement from using reasonable possible alternatives in ‘Corporate, sovereign
    and other debt securities’ from ‘Equity securities’.




                                                                                                                                                                         249
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Quantitative Information about the Sensitivity of Significant Unobservable Inputs
The behavior of the unobservable parameters on Level 3 fair value measurement is not necessarily independent, and dynamic
relationships often exist between the other unobservable parameters and the observable parameters. Such relationships,
where material to the fair value of a given instrument, are explicitly captured via correlation parameters, or are otherwise
controlled via pricing models or valuation techniques. Frequently, where a valuation technique utilizes more than one input,
the choice of a certain input will bound the range of possible values for other inputs. In addition, broader market factors (such
as interest rates, equity, credit or commodity indices or foreign exchange rates) can also have effects.

The range of values shown below represents the highest and lowest inputs used to value the significant exposures within
Level 3. The diversity of financial instruments that make up the disclosure is significant and therefore the ranges of certain
parameters can be large. For example, the range of credit spreads on mortgage backed securities represents performing,
more liquid positions with lower spreads then the less liquid, non-performing positions which will have higher credit spreads.
As Level 3 contains the less liquid fair value instruments, the wide ranges of parameters seen is to be expected, as there is a
high degree of pricing differentiation within each exposure type to capture the relevant market dynamics. There follows a brief
description of each of the principal parameter types, along with a commentary on significant interrelationships between them.

Credit Parameters are used to assess the creditworthiness of an exposure, by enabling the probability of default and resulting
losses of a default to be represented. The credit spread is the primary reflection of creditworthiness, and represents the
premium or yield return above the benchmark reference instrument (typically LIBOR, or relevant Treasury Instrument,
depending upon the asset being assessed), that a bond holder would require to allow for the credit quality difference between
that entity and the reference benchmark. Higher credit spreads will indicate lower credit quality, and lead to a lower value for
a given bond or other loan-asset that is to be repaid to the holder or lender by the borrower. Recovery Rates represent an
estimate of the amount a lender would receive in the case of a default of a loan, or a bond holder would receive in the case of
default of the bond. Higher recovery rates will give a higher valuation for a given bond position, if other parameters are he ld
constant. Constant Default Rate (CDR) and Constant Prepayment Rate (CPR) allow more complex loan and debt assets to
be assessed, as these parameters estimate the ongoing defaults arising on scheduled repayments and coupons, or whether
the borrower is making additional (usually voluntary) prepayments. These parameters are particularly relevant when forming
a fair value opinion for mortgage or other types of lending, where repayments are delivered by the borrower through time, or
where the borrower may pre-pay the loan (seen for example in some residential mortgages). Higher CDR will lead to lower
valuation of a given loan or mortgage as the lender will ultimately receive less cash.

Interest rates, credit spreads, inflation rates, foreign exchange rates and equity prices are referenced in some option
instruments, or other complex derivatives, where the payoff a holder of the derivative will receive is dependent upon the
behavior of these underlying references through time. Volatility parameters describe key attributes of option behavior by
enabling the variability of returns of the underlying instrument to be assessed. This volatility is a measure of probability, with
higher volatilities denoting higher probabilities of a particular outcome occurring. The underlying references (interest rate s,
credit spreads etc.) have an effect on the valuation of options, by describing the size of the return that can be expected from
the option. Therefore, the value of a given option is dependent upon the value of the underlying instrument, and the volatility
of that instrument, representing the size of the payoff, and the probability of that payoff occurring. Where volatilities are high,
the option holder will see a higher option value as there is greater probability of positive returns. A higher option value will also
occur where the payoff described by the option is significant.

Correlations are used to describe influential relationships between underlying references where a derivative or other
instrument has more than one underlying reference. Behind some of these relationships, for example commodity correlation
and interest rate-foreign exchange correlations, typically lie macroeconomic factors such as the impact of global demand on
groups of commodities, or the pricing parity effect of interest rates on foreign exchange rates. More specific relationships can
exist between credit references or equity stocks in the case of credit derivatives and equity basket derivatives, for example.
Credit correlations are used to estimate the relationship between the credit performance of a range of credit names, and stock
correlations are used to estimate the relationship between the returns of a range of equities. A derivative with a correlation
exposure will be either long- or short-correlation. A high correlation suggests a strong relationship between the underlying
references is in force, and this will lead to an increase in value of a long-correlation derivative. Negative correlations suggest
that the relationship between underlying references is opposing, i.e., an increase in price of one underlying reference will lead
to a reduction in the price of the other.

An EBITDA (‘earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization’) multiple approach can be used in the valuation of
less liquid securities. Under this approach the enterprise value (‘EV’) of an entity can be estimated via identifying the ratio of
the EV to EBITDA of a comparable observable entity and applying this ratio to the EBITDA of the entity for which a valuation
is being estimated. Under this approach a liquidity adjustment is often applied due to the difference in liquidity between the
generally listed comparable used and the company under valuation. A higher EV/EBITDA multiple will result in a higher fair
value.




                                                                                                                               250
Deutsche Bank                                                           Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                      13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




Financial instruments classified in Level 3 and quantitative information about unobservable inputs
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021
                                                                             Fair value
in € m.                                                                                                                   Significant unobservable
(unless stated otherwise)                                      Assets         Liabilities   Valuation technique(s)¹       input(s) (Level 3)                             Range
Financial instruments held at fair value –
Non-Derivative financial instruments held at
fair value:
Mortgage and other asset backed
securities held for trading:

    Commercial mortgage-backed
    securities                                                     47                 0     Price based                   Price                             0%          114 %
                                                                                            Discounted cash flow          Credit spread (bps)                81         1,235
    Mortgage- and other asset-backed
    securities
                                                                   81                 0     Price based                   Price                             0%          112 %
                                                                                            Discounted cash flow          Credit spread (bps)                85         1,495
                                                                                                                          Recovery rate                     0%           85 %
                                                                                                                          Constant default rate             0%            2%
                                                                                                                          Constant prepayment rate          0%           27 %
Total mortgage- and other asset-backed
securities
                                                                 128                  0
Debt securities and other
debt obligations                                               5,074            1,654       Price based                   Price                             0%          212 %
  Held for trading                                             3,383               33       Discounted cash flow          Credit spread (bps)                12           571
     Corporate, sovereign and
     other debt securities                                     3,383
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory
  at fair value through profit or loss                         1,568
  Designated at fair value through profit or
  loss                                                              0           1,621
  Financial assets at fair value through
  other comprehensive income                                     123
Equity securities                                                660                  0     Market approach               Price per net asset value         0%          101 %
                                                                                                                          Enterprise value/EBITDA
    Held for trading
                                                                 103                  0                                   (multiple)                          5            17
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory                                                                                  Weighted average cost
  at fair value through profit or loss                           557                        Discounted cash flow          capital                           6%           20 %
  Designated at fair value through profit or
  loss                                                             0                        Price based                   Price                             0%          139 %
Loans                                                          8,184                49      Price based                   Price                             0%          275 %
  Held for trading                                             5,188                49      Discounted cash flow          Credit spread (bps)                34         2,117
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory
  at fair value through profit or loss                           769
  Designated at fair value through profit or
  loss                                                             48                 0                                   Recovery rate                    40 %          85 %
  Financial assets at fair value through
  other comprehensive income                                   2,179
Loan commitments                                                   0                  7     Discounted cash flow          Credit spread (bps)               128           906
                                                                                                                          Recovery rate                    40 %          75 %
                                                                                            Loan pricing model            Utilization                       0%          100 %
Other financial instruments                                    2,0162              1123     Discounted cash flow          IRR                               7%           16 %
                                                                                                                          Repo rate (bps)                   (27)          400
Total non-derivative financial
instruments held at fair value                               16,062             1,823
1
    Valuation technique(s) and subsequently the significant unobservable input(s) relate to the respective total position.
2
    Other financial assets include € 13 million of other trading assets and € 2.0 billion of other non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value.
3
    Other financial liabilities include € 112 million of securities sold under repurchase agreements designated at fair value.




                                                                                                                                                                         251
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                   13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021
                                                                         Fair value
in € m.                                                                                                             Significant unobservable
(unless stated otherwise)                                   Assets        Liabilities   Valuation technique(s)      input(s) (Level 3)                                    Range
Financial instruments held at fair value:
Market values from derivative
financial instruments:
   Interest rate derivatives                                4,725           4,724       Discounted cash flow        Swap rate (bps)                          (80)           817
                                                                                                                    Inflation swap rate                      1%             5%
                                                                                                                    Constant default rate                    0%            20 %
                                                                                                                    Constant prepayment rate                 4%            24 %
                                                                                        Option pricing model        Inflation volatility                     0%             9%
                                                                                                                    Interest rate volatility                 0%            31 %
                                                                                                                    IR - IR correlation                    (1) %           99 %
                                                                                                                    Hybrid correlation                    (70) %          100 %
    Credit derivatives                                        686              827      Discounted cash flow        Credit spread (bps)                        2          6,630
                                                                                                                    Recovery rate                            0%            40 %
                                                                                        Correlation pricing
                                                                                        model                       Credit correlation                     30 %           63 %
    Equity derivatives                                        766           1,749       Option pricing model        Stock volatility                       25 %           68 %
                                                                                                                    Index volatility                       11 %           80 %
                                                                                                                                                             88             91
                                                                                                                    Index - index correlation         %               %
                                                                                                                    Stock - stock correlation                0%             0%
                                                                                                                    Stock Forwards                           0%             9%
                                                                                                                    Index Forwards                           0%             5%
    FX derivatives                                          1,816           1,913       Option pricing model        Volatility                            (33) %           59 %
                                                                                                                    Quoted Vol                               0%             0%
    Other derivatives                                       1,127              3881     Discounted cash flow        Credit spread (bps)                        –              –
                                                                                        Option pricing model        Index volatility                         0%           131 %
                                                                                                                    Commodity correlation                   15 %           86 %
Total market values from derivative
financial instruments                                       9,120           9,601
1
    Includes derivatives which are embedded in contracts where the host contract is held at amortized cost but for which the embedded derivative is separated.




                                                                                                                                                                           252
Deutsche Bank                                                            Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                       13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




                                                                                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2020
                                                                              Fair value
in € m.                                                                                                                    Significant unobservable
(unless stated otherwise)                                       Assets        Liabilities   Valuation technique(s)¹        input(s) (Level 3)                                     Range
Financial instruments held at fair value –
Non-Derivative financial instruments
held at fair value:
Mortgage and other asset backed
securities held for trading:
  Commercial mortgage-backed
  securities                                                       28                 0     Price based                    Price                                    0%           114 %
                                                                                            Discounted cash flow           Credit spread (bps)                      133          1,270
    Mortgage- and other asset-backed
    securities                                                    155                 0     Price based                    Price                                    0%           106 %
                                                                                            Discounted cash flow           Credit spread (bps)                      109          1,295
                                                                                                                           Recovery rate                           10 %           90 %
                                                                                                                           Constant default rate                    1%             2%
                                                                                                                           Constant prepayment rate                 1%            25 %
Total mortgage- and other asset-backed
securities
                                                                  183                 0
Debt securities and other debt
obligations                                                    4,625               769      Price based                    Price                                     0%          200 %
  Held for trading                                             2,813                 2      Discounted cash flow           Credit spread (bps)                        21           544
     Corporate, sovereign and other
     debt securities                                           2,813
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory
  at fair value through profit or loss                         1,652
  Designated at fair value through profit or
  loss                                                               0             768
  Financial assets at fair value through
  other comprehensive income                                      160
Equity securities                                                 727                 0     Market approach                Price per net asset value               42 %          100 %
                                                                                                                           Enterprise value/EBITDA
    Held for trading
                                                                   70                 0                                    (multiple)                                  5             23
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory                                                                                   Weighted average cost
  at fair value through profit or loss                            657                       Discounted cash flow           capital                                   8%           20 %
  Designated at fair value through profit or
  loss                                                             0                        Price based                    Price                                     0%          108 %
Loans                                                          7,888                  0     Price based                    Price                                     0%          373 %
  Held for trading                                             5,101                  0     Discounted cash flow           Credit spread (bps)                        51         2,233
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory
  at fair value through profit or loss                            910
  Designated at fair value through profit or
  loss                                                               0                0                                    Recovery rate                           20 %           85 %
  Financial assets at fair value through
  other comprehensive income                                   1,877
Loan commitments                                                   0                  1     Discounted cash flow           Credit spread (bps)                        6          2,444
                                                                                                                           Recovery rate                           25 %          100 %
                                                                                            Loan pricing model             Utilization                              0%           100 %
Other financial instruments                                    1,4322              1983     Discounted cash flow           IRR                                      7%            16 %
                                                                                                                           Repo rate (bps)                            0             75
Total non-derivative financial
instruments held at fair value                                14,854               968
1
    Valuation technique(s) and subsequently the significant unobservable input(s) relate to the respective total position.
2
    Other financial assets include € 16 million of other trading assets and € 1.4 billion other financial assets mandatory at fair value.
3
    Other financial liabilities include € 192 million of securities sold under repurchase agreements designated at fair value and € 6 million of other financial liabilities designated at
    fair value.




                                                                                                                                                                                   253
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                   13 – Financial Instruments carried at Fair Value




                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2020
                                                                         Fair value
in € m.                                                                                                             Significant unobservable
(unless stated otherwise)                                   Assets        Liabilities   Valuation technique(s)      input(s) (Level 3)                                  Range
Financial instruments held at fair value:
Market values from derivative
financial instruments:
   Interest rate derivatives                                4,708           4,025       Discounted cash flow        Swap rate (bps)                        (77)          787
                                                                                                                    Inflation swap rate                    1%            3%
                                                                                                                    Constant default rate                  0%           10 %
                                                                                                                    Constant prepayment rate               2%           30 %
                                                                                        Option pricing model        Inflation volatility                   0%            8%
                                                                                                                    Interest rate volatility               0%           19 %
                                                                                                                    IR - IR correlation                 (25) %          97 %
                                                                                                                    Hybrid correlation                  (70) %         100 %
    Credit derivatives                                        575              585      Discounted cash flow        Credit spread (bps)                      0         1,759
                                                                                                                    Recovery rate                          0%           77 %
                                                                                        Correlation pricing
                                                                                        model                       Credit correlation                    31 %          63 %
    Equity derivatives                                        800           1,916       Option pricing model        Stock volatility                       4%           85 %
                                                                                                                    Index volatility                      17 %          75 %
                                                                                                                    Index - index correlation             68 %          96 %
                                                                                                                    Stock - stock correlation             41 %          67 %
                                                                                                                    Stock Forwards                         0%            5%
                                                                                                                    Index Forwards                         0%            4%
    FX derivatives                                          1,749           1,427       Option pricing model        Volatility                          (16) %          42 %
                                                                                                                    Quoted Vol                             0%            0%
    Other derivatives                                         898              (54)1 Discounted cash flow           Credit spread (bps)                      –             –
                                                                                     Option pricing model           Index volatility                       0%          113 %
                                                                                                                    Commodity correlation                 16 %          52 %
Total market values from derivative
financial instruments                                       8,729           7,899
1
    Includes derivatives which are embedded in contracts where the host contract is held at amortized cost but for which the embedded derivative is separated.



Unrealized Gains or Losses on Level 3 Instruments held or in Issue at the
Reporting Date
The unrealized gains or losses on Level 3 Instruments are not due solely to unobservable parameters. Many of the parameter
inputs to the valuation of instruments in this level of the hierarchy are observable and the gain or loss is partly due to
movements in these observable parameters over the period. Many of the positions in this level of the hierarchy are
economically hedged by instruments which are categorized in other levels of the fair value hierarchy. The offsetting gains and
losses that have been recorded on all such hedges are not included in the table below, which only shows the gains and losses
related to the Level 3 classified instruments themselves held at the reporting date in accordance with IFRS 13. The unrealized
gains and losses on Level 3 instruments are included in both net interest income and net gains on financial assets/liabilities
at fair value through profit or loss in the consolidated income statement.

in € m.                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021          Dec 31, 2020
Financial assets held at fair value:
  Trading securities                                                                                                                                (332)                  38
  Positive market values from derivative financial instruments                                                                                     1,556                2,589
  Other trading assets                                                                                                                                93                 (248)
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                                                                        241                  (14)
  Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                    (0)                   0
  Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                                                                   (0)                  20
  Other financial assets at fair value                                                                                                                 3                    4
Total financial assets held at fair value                                                                                                          1,560                2,389
Financial liabilities held at fair value:
  Trading securities                                                                                                                                  (0)                  (0)
  Negative market values from derivative financial instruments                                                                                    (1,292)              (2,536)
  Other trading liabilities                                                                                                                           15                    0
  Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                             (895)                  53
  Other financial liabilities at fair value                                                                                                            8                  (26)
Total financial liabilities held at fair value                                                                                                    (2,165)              (2,510)
Total                                                                                                                                               (604)                (121)




                                                                                                                                                                        254
Deutsche Bank                                          Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                     14 – Fair Value of Financial Instruments not carried at Fair Value




Recognition of Trade Date Profit
If there are significant unobservable inputs used in a valuation technique, the financial instrument is recognized at the
transaction price and any trade date profit is deferred. The table below presents the year-to-year movement of the trade date
profits deferred due to significant unobservable parameters for financial instruments classified at fair value through profit or
loss. The balance is predominantly related to derivative instruments.

in € m.                                                                                                                     2021               2020
Balance, beginning of year                                                                                                   454                441
New trades during the period                                                                                                 212                308
Amortization                                                                                                                (142)              (140)
Matured trades                                                                                                               (61)              (130)
Subsequent move to observability                                                                                              (4)               (22)
Exchange rate changes                                                                                                          2                 (4)
Balance, end of year                                                                                                         462                454




14 – Fair Value of Financial Instruments not carried at Fair
Value
Financial instruments not carried at fair value are not managed on a fair value basis. For these instruments fair values are
calculated for disclosure purposes only and do not impact the Group balance sheet or income statement. Additionally, since
the instruments generally do not trade there is significant management judgment required to determine these fair values.

For the following financial instruments which are predominantly short-term the carrying value represents a reasonable estimate
of the fair value:

Assets                                                                     Liabilities
Cash and central bank balances                                             Deposits
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                     Central bank funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase
                                                                           agreements
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased under resale              Securities loaned
agreements
Securities borrowed                                                        Other short-term borrowings
Other financial assets                                                     Other financial liabilities


For retail lending portfolios with a large number of homogenous loans (e.g. residential mortgages), the fair value is calculated
for each product type by discounting the portfolio’s contractual cash flows using the Group’s new loan rates for lending to
issuers of similar credit quality. Key inputs for retail mortgages are the difference between historic and current product margins
and the estimated prepayment rates. Capitalized broker fees included in the carrying value are considered to also be at fair
value.

The fair value of the corporate lending portfolio is estimated by discounting the loan till its maturity based on loan specific
credit spreads and funding costs for the Group.

For long-term debt and trust preferred securities, fair value is determined from quoted market prices, where available. Where
quoted market prices are not available, fair value is estimated using a valuation technique that discounts the remaining
contractual cash flows at a rate at which an instrument with similar characteristics is quoted in the market.




                                                                                                                                               255
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                    14 – Fair Value of Financial Instruments not carried at Fair Value




Estimated fair value of financial instruments not carried at fair value on the balance sheet 1
                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                    Valuation            Valuation
                                                                                                                                  Quoted           technique            technique
                                                                                                                                 prices in        observable         unobservable
                                                                                                                           active market          parameters           parameters
in € m.                                                                        Carrying value            Fair value             (Level 1)           (Level 2)            (Level 3)
Financial assets:
Cash and central bank balances                                                      192,021              192,021               192,021                     0                     0
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                                7,342                7,342                     0                 7,342                     0
Central bank funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements                                                     8,368                8,429                      0               7,651                  778
Securities borrowed                                                                      63                   63                      0                  63                    0
Loans                                                                               471,319              476,674                      0              13,682              462,991
Other financial assets                                                               94,588               94,732                  9,048              85,335                  349
Financial liabilities:
Deposits                                                                            603,750              604,645                     307            604,338                      0
Central bank funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements                                                        747                  745                      0                 745                     0
Securities loaned                                                                        24                   24                      0                  24                     0
Other short-term borrowings                                                           4,034                4,035                      0               4,010                    25
Other financial liabilities                                                          81,047               81,047                  2,023              79,023                     0
Long-term debt                                                                      144,485              146,871                      0             141,189                 5,683
Trust preferred securities                                                              528                  587                      0                 587                     0



                                                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                    Valuation            Valuation
                                                                                                                                  Quoted           technique            technique
                                                                                                                                 prices in        observable         unobservable
                                                                                                                           active market          parameters           parameters
in € m.                                                                        Carrying value            Fair value             (Level 1)           (Level 2)            (Level 3)
Financial assets:
Cash and central bank balances                                                      166,208              166,208               166,208                     0                     0
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                                9,130                9,132                   866                 8,266                     0
Central bank funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements                                                     8,533                8,519                      0               7,694                  825
Securities borrowed                                                                       0                    0                      0                   0                    0
Loans                                                                               426,995              434,442                      0              13,253              421,189
Other financial assets                                                               94,069               94,393                  7,714              86,049                  629
Financial liabilities:
Deposits                                                                            568,031              568,172                      66            568,105                      0
Central bank funds purchased and securities
sold under repurchase agreements                                                      2,325                2,328                      0               2,328                     0
Securities loaned                                                                     1,697                1,697                      0               1,697                     0
Other short-term borrowings                                                           3,553                3,556                      0               3,540                    15
Other financial liabilities                                                          96,602               96,602                  1,902              94,700                     0
Long-term debt                                                                      149,163              150,691                      0             144,130                 6,560
Trust preferred securities                                                            1,321                1,069                      0               1,069                     0
1
    Amounts generally presented on a gross basis, in line with the Group’s accounting policy regarding offsetting of financial instruments as described in Note 1 “Significant
    Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates”.


For loans, the difference between fair value and carrying value is due to the effect of product margin movements since initial
recognition.

For long-term debt and trust preferred securities, the difference between fair value and carrying value is due to the effect of
changes in the rates at which the Group could issue debt with similar maturity and subordination at the balance sheet date
compared to when the instrument was issued.




                                                                                                                                                                             256
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  16 – Equity Method Investments




15 – Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive
income
in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020
Securities purchased under resale agreement                                                                                                     1,231               1,543
Debt securities:
  German government                                                                                                                              876              10,245
  U.S. Treasury and U.S. government agencies                                                                                                   8,770               9,221
  U.S. local (municipal) governments                                                                                                             253                 251
  Other foreign governments                                                                                                                   10,965              26,308
  Corporates                                                                                                                                     604               2,272
  Other asset-backed securities                                                                                                                    0                  31
  Mortgage-backed securities, including obligations of U.S. federal agencies                                                                     714                 636
  Other debt securities                                                                                                                        1,194                 692
Total debt securities                                                                                                                         23,377              49,656
Loans                                                                                                                                          4,370               4,635
Total financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                                                       28,979              55,834




16 – Equity Method Investments
Investments in associates and jointly controlled entities are accounted for using the equity method of accounting.

The Group holds interests in 59 (2020: 60) associates and 10 (2020: 11) jointly controlled entities. Two associates are
considered to be material to the Group.

Significant investments as of December 31, 20211
Investment                                                         Principal place of business             Nature of relationship               Ownership percentage
Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company
                                                                   Beijing, China                          Strategic Investment                 40.7 %
Limited
Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                  Shanghai, China                         Strategic Investment                 30.0 %
1
    The Group has significant influence over these investees through its holding percentage and representation on the board seats.



Summarized financial information on Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company Limited1
in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2020        Dec 31, 2019
Total net revenues                                                                                                                                 76                  97
Net income                                                                                                                                         54                  62
Other comprehensive income                                                                                                                          0                  54
Total comprehensive income2                                                                                                                        54                 116

in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2020        Dec 31, 2019
  Current assets                                                                                                                                2,979               2,323
  Non-Current assets                                                                                                                              247                 804
Total assets                                                                                                                                    3,226               3,127
  Current liabilities                                                                                                                           1,273               1,157
  Non-Current liabilities                                                                                                                       1,180               1,274
Total liabilities                                                                                                                               2,453               2,431
Noncontrolling Interest                                                                                                                             0                  (3)
Net assets of the equity method investee                                                                                                          773                 699
1
    Due to the difference in reporting timelines for the Group and Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company Limited Equity method accounting was performed for December
    2021 based on December 2020 PRC GAAP audited financials and for December 2020 based on December 2019 PRC GAAP audited financials.
2
    The Group received dividends from Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company Limited of € 0 million during the reporting period 2021 (2020: € 9 million).


Reconciliation of total net assets of Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company Limited to the Group’s carrying amount 1
in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2020        Dec 31, 2019
Net assets of the equity method investee                                                                                                         773                 699
Group's ownership percentage on the investee's equity                                                                                         40.7 %              40.7 %
Group's share of net assets                                                                                                                      315                 284
Goodwill                                                                                                                                            0                   0
Intangible Assets                                                                                                                                   0                   0
Other adjustments                                                                                                                                 (97)                 (9)
Carrying amount2                                                                                                                                 218                 275
1
    Due to the difference in reporting timelines for the Group and Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company Limited Equity method accounting was performed for December
    2021 based on December 2020 PRC GAAP audited financials and for December 2020 based on December 2019 PRC GAAP audited financials.
2
    There is impairment loss of € 97 million in 2021 (€ 0 million in 2020). The loss was driven by impairment write downs from underperforming credit balances in the weaker
    Chinese real estate sector in 2021.




                                                                                                                                                                     257
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  17 – Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities




Summarized financial information on Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.
in € m.                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021¹       Dec 31, 2020²
Total net revenues                                                                                                                               1,147                   842
Net income                                                                                                                                         295                   224
Other comprehensive income                                                                                                                          (1)                   (5)
Total comprehensive income3                                                                                                                        294                   219

in € m.                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020
  Current assets                                                                                                                                 1,291                  1,015
  Non-Current assets                                                                                                                               966                    804
Total assets                                                                                                                                     2,257                  1,819
  Current liabilities                                                                                                                            1,006                    760
  Non-Current liabilities                                                                                                                          192                    169
Total liabilities                                                                                                                                1,197                    929
Noncontrolling Interest                                                                                                                             35                     23
Net assets of the equity method investee                                                                                                         1,024                    867
1
    December 2021 numbers are based on 2021 unaudited financials.
2
    December 2020 numbers are based on 2020 audited financials.
3
    The Group received dividends from Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd. of € 68 million during the reporting period 2021 (2020: € 21 million) and in 2020 reported an
    extraordinary dividend receivable of € 6 million, received in 2021.


Reconciliation of total net assets of Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.to the Group’s carrying amount
in € m.                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021¹       Dec 31, 2020²
Net assets of the equity method investee                                                                                                         1,024                   867
Group's ownership percentage on the investee's equity                                                                                            30 %                   30 %
Group's share of net assets                                                                                                                        307                   260
Goodwill                                                                                                                                            17                    16
Intangible Assets                                                                                                                                   15                    14
Other adjustments                                                                                                                                    1                     0
Carrying amount3                                                                                                                                   341                   290
1
    December 2021 numbers are based on 2021 unaudited financials.
2
    December 2020 numbers are based on 2020 audited financials.
3
    There is no impairment loss in 2021 (€ 0 million in 2020).


Aggregated financial information on the Group’s share in associates and joint ventures that are individually immaterial
in € m.                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021        Dec 31, 2020
Carrying amount of all associates that are individually immaterial to the Group                                                                     532                  337
Aggregated amount of the Group's share of profit (loss) from continuing operations                                                                   87                   20
Aggregated amount of the Group's share of post-tax profit (loss) from discontinued operations                                                         0                    0
Aggregated amount of the Group's share of other comprehensive income                                                                                 (6)                 (10)
Aggregated amount of the Group's share of total comprehensive income                                                                                 81                   10




17 – Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities
The Group is eligible to present certain financial assets and financial liabilities on a net basis on the balance sheet pursuant
to criteria described in Note 1 “Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates: Offsetting Financial
Instruments”.

The following tables provide information on the impact of offsetting on the consolidated balance sheet, as well as the financial
impact of netting for instruments subject to an enforceable master netting arrangement or similar agreement as well as
available cash and financial instrument collateral.




                                                                                                                                                                        258
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                    17 – Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities




Assets
                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                              Net       Amounts not set off on the balance sheet
                                                                                                       amounts
                                                                                           Gross     of financial
                                                                                        amounts           assets
                                                                            Gross         set off     presented         Impact of
                                                                        amounts           on the           on the         Master                       Financial
                                                                      of financial       balance         balance          Netting          Cash      instrument
in € m.                                                                    assets          sheet            sheet     Agreements       collateral     collateral¹    Net amount
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements (enforceable)                                      14,449        (8,532)          5,917                0               0        (5,667)             251
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements (non-enforceable)                                   2,451              0          2,451                0               0        (2,403)              48
Securities borrowed (enforceable)                                              63              0             63                0               0           (63)               0
Securities borrowed (non-enforceable)                                           0              0              0                0               0             0                0
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss
(enforceable)                                                             471,122      (117,007)      354,115          (240,587)       (33,953)        (71,766)           7,808
  Of which: Positive market values from derivative
  financial instruments (enforceable)                                     296,520       (11,959)      284,561          (238,411)       (33,950)         (4,516)           7,685
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss
(non-enforceable)                                                         137,118              0      137,118                  0         (2,026)       (12,124)        122,968
  Of which: Positive market values from derivative
  financial instruments (non-enforceable)                                  15,170              0        15,170                 0         (1,963)        (1,263)         11,944
Total financial assets at fair value through profit
or loss                                                                   608,240      (117,007)      491,233          (240,587)       (35,978)        (83,890)        130,777
Loans at amortized cost                                                   471,319             0       471,319                 0        (12,271)        (60,794)        398,254
Other assets                                                              109,182        (5,398)      103,785           (30,639)          (101)            (63)         72,981
  Of which: Positive market values from derivatives
  qualifying for hedge accounting (enforceable)                          1,211             (106)        1,106              (881)          (101)           (63)              61
Remaining assets subject to netting                                      1,231                0         1,231                 0              0              0            1,231
Remaining assets not subject to netting                                247,994                0       247,994                 0           (141)        (2,320)         245,532
Total assets                                                         1,454,930         (130,937)    1,323,993          (271,227)       (48,492)      (155,200)         849,074
1
    Excludes real estate and other non-financial instrument collateral.


Liabilities
                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                               Net      Amounts not set off on the balance sheet
                                                                                                       amounts
                                                                                           Gross     of financial
                                                                                        amounts         liabilities
                                                                            Gross         set off     presented         Impact of
                                                                        amounts           on the           on the         Master                       Financial
                                                                      of financial       balance         balance          Netting          Cash      instrument
in € m.                                                                  liabilities       sheet            sheet     Agreements       collateral      collateral    Net amount
Deposits                                                                  603,750              0      603,750                  0               0               0       603,750
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold
under repurchase agreements (enforceable)                                   9,275        (8,532)             743               0               0          (743)               0
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold
under repurchase agreements (non-enforceable)                                    4             0                4              0               0              0               4
Securities loaned (enforceable)                                                 22             0               22              0               0            (22)              0
Securities loaned (non-enforceable)                                              2             0                2              0               0             (2)              0
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
(enforceable)                                                             497,045      (117,101)      379,944          (240,380)       (27,607)        (50,690)         61,267
  Of which: Negative market values from derivative
  financial instruments (enforceable)                                     288,685       (12,551)      276,134          (237,915)       (27,607)         (4,063)           6,549
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
(non-enforceable)                                                          20,913              0        20,913                 0         (1,261)        (4,658)         14,994
  Of which: Negative market values from derivative
  financial instruments (non-enforceable)                                  10,975              0        10,975                 0         (1,261)          (157)           9,556
Total financial liabilities at fair value through profit
or loss                                                                   517,958      (117,101)      400,857          (240,380)       (28,868)        (55,347)         76,261
Other liabilities                                                         103,100        (5,304)       97,796           (38,678)           (49)             (2)         59,067
  Of which: Negative market values from derivatives
  qualifying for hedge accounting (enforceable)                          2,174             (708)        1,467            (1,378)           (49)             (2)             37
Remaining liabilities not subject to netting                           152,788                0       152,788                 0              0               0         152,788
Total liabilities                                                    1,386,900         (130,937)    1,255,962          (279,058)       (28,918)        (56,117)        891,870




                                                                                                                                                                          259
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                    17 – Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities




Assets
                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                              Net       Amounts not set off on the balance sheet
                                                                                                       amounts
                                                                                          Gross      of financial
                                                                                       amounts            assets
                                                                            Gross        set off      presented         Impact of
                                                                        amounts          on the            on the         Master                       Financial
                                                                      of financial      balance          balance          Netting          Cash      instrument
in € m.                                                                    assets         sheet             sheet     Agreements       collateral     collateral¹    Net amount
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements (enforceable)                                       8,234       (2,863)           5,371                0               0        (5,319)              53
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased
under resale agreements (non-enforceable)                                   3,161             0           3,161                0               0        (2,855)             307
Securities borrowed (enforceable)                                               0             0               0                0               0             0                0
Securities borrowed (non-enforceable)                                           0             0               0                0               0             0                0
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss
(enforceable)                                                             463,354      (84,550)       378,804          (263,479)       (45,066)        (58,410)         11,849
  Of which: Positive market values from derivative
  financial instruments (enforceable)                                     336,933      (12,552)       324,380          (262,486)       (45,048)         (5,162)         11,684
  Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss
  (non-enforceable)                                                       149,137             0       149,137                  0         (1,098)       (12,790)        135,249
  Of which: Positive market values from derivative
  financial instruments (non-enforceable)                                  19,074             0         19,074                 0         (1,003)        (1,116)         16,955
Total financial assets at fair value through profit
or loss                                                                   612,491      (84,550)       527,941          (263,479)       (46,164)        (71,200)        147,098
Loans at amortized cost                                                   426,995            0        426,995                 0        (12,129)        (52,571)        362,294
Other assets                                                              120,574      (10,175)       110,399           (43,316)          (412)            (90)         66,581
  Of which: Positive market values from derivatives
  qualifying for hedge accounting (enforceable)                          3,329             (26)         3,303            (2,646)          (411)           (90)             156
Remaining assets subject to netting                                      1,543               0          1,543                 0              0              0            1,543
Remaining assets not subject to netting                                249,848               0        249,848                 0           (384)        (2,768)         246,697
Total assets                                                         1,422,846         (97,587)     1,325,259          (306,795)       (59,089)      (134,803)         824,573
1
    Excludes real estate and other non-financial instrument collateral.


Liabilities
                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                               Net      Amounts not set off on the balance sheet
                                                                                                       amounts
                                                                                          Gross      of financial
                                                                                       amounts          liabilities
                                                                            Gross        set off      presented         Impact of
                                                                        amounts          on the            on the         Master                       Financial
                                                                      of financial      balance          balance          Netting          Cash      instrument
in € m.                                                                  liabilities      sheet             sheet     Agreements       collateral      collateral    Net amount
Deposits                                                                  568,031             0       568,031                  0               0               0       568,031
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold
under repurchase agreements (enforceable)                                   4,586        (2,263)          2,323                0               0        (2,323)               0
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold
under repurchase agreements (non-enforceable)                                   3             0               3                0               0            (2)               1
Securities loaned (enforceable)                                             1,686             0           1,686                0               0        (1,686)               0
Securities loaned (non-enforceable)                                            11             0              11                0               0            (2)               9
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
(enforceable)                                                             478,541      (85,315)       393,226          (265,150)       (34,846)        (41,642)         51,588
  Of which: Negative market values from derivative
  financial instruments (enforceable)                                     325,203      (13,227)       311,976          (264,042)       (34,846)         (5,816)           7,273
  Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
  (non-enforceable)                                                        25,972             0         25,972                 0         (1,875)        (6,184)         17,914
  Of which: Negative market values from derivative
  financial instruments (non-enforceable)                                  15,798             0         15,798                 0         (1,875)           (166)        13,757
Total financial liabilities at fair value through profit
or loss                                                                   504,513      (85,315)       419,199          (265,150)       (36,721)        (47,826)         69,502
Other liabilities                                                         124,218      (10,010)       114,208           (49,534)          (121)             (6)         64,547
  Of which: Negative market values from derivatives
  qualifying for hedge accounting (enforceable)                          2,803          (1,524)         1,279            (1,090)          (121)             (6)             62
Remaining liabilities not subject to netting                           157,602               0        157,602                 0             (2)             (1)        157,599
Total liabilities                                                    1,360,650         (97,587)     1,263,063          (314,684)       (36,844)        (51,845)        859,689


For 2020, other assets included € 1.4 billion positive market values for derivative financial instruments which have been
reclassified into asset held for sale, associated with the Prime Finance platform being transferred to BNP Paribas, along with
the corresponding impact of master netting agreements and collateralization. Due to the same reason, other liabilities included
€ 1.9 billion negative market values for derivative financial instruments which have been reclassified into liabilities held for
sale, along with the corresponding impact of master netting agreements and collateralization. For further information please
refer to Note 24 Non-Current Assets and Disposal Groups Held for Sale” to the consolidated financial statements.




                                                                                                                                                                          260
Deutsche Bank                                             Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                        18 – Loans




The column ‘Gross amounts set off on the balance sheet’ discloses the amounts offset in accordance with all the criteria
described in Note 1 “Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates: Offsetting Financial Instruments”.

The column ‘Impact of Master Netting Agreements’ discloses the amounts that are subject to master netting agreements but
were not offset because they did not meet the net settlement/simultaneous settlement criteria; or because the rights of set off
are conditional upon the default of the counterparty only. The amounts presented for other assets and other liabilities include
cash margin receivables and payables respectively.

The columns ‘Cash collateral’ and ‘Financial instrument collateral’ disclose the cash and financial instrument collateral
amounts received or pledged in relation to the total amounts of assets and liabilities, including those that were not offset.

Non-enforceable master netting agreements or similar agreements refer to contracts executed in jurisdictions where the rights
of set off may not be upheld under the local bankruptcy laws.

The cash collateral received against the positive market values of derivatives and the cash collateral pledged towards the
negative mark-to-market values of derivatives are booked within the ‘Other liabilities’ and ‘Other assets’ balances respectively.

The Cash and Financial instrument collateral amounts disclosed reflect their fair values. The rights of set off relating to the
cash and financial instrument collateral are conditional upon the default of the counterparty.


18 – Loans
The entire loan book presented includes loans classified at amortized cost, loans at fair value through other comprehensive
income and loans at fair value through profit and loss.

The below table gives an overview of our loan exposure by industry, and is based on the NACE code of the counterparty.
NACE (Nomenclature des Activités Économiques dans la Communauté Européenne) is a standard European industry
classification system.

Loans by industry classification
in € m.                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Agriculture, forestry and fishing                                                                                           647            637
Mining and quarrying                                                                                                      3,006          3,145
Manufacturing                                                                                                            36,820         28,040
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply                                                                       4,819          3,765
Water supply, sewerage, waste management and remediation activities                                                         681            681
Construction                                                                                                              4,651          4,708
Wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles                                                     22,444         22,023
Transport and storage                                                                                                     6,067          6,382
Accommodation and food service activities                                                                                 2,272          2,514
Information and communication                                                                                             7,387          6,240
Financial and insurance activities                                                                                      111,239         90,220
Real estate activities                                                                                                   43,220         37,946
Professional, scientific and technical activities                                                                         7,022          7,946
Administrative and support service activities                                                                            10,324          9,568
Public administration and defense, compulsory social security                                                             7,076          7,413
Education                                                                                                                   225            205
Human health services and social work activities                                                                          4,005          3,530
Arts, entertainment and recreation                                                                                        1,068            951
Other service activities                                                                                                  5,261          6,165
Activities of households as employers, undifferentiated goods- and services-producing activities of households for
                                                                                                                        212,436        205,331
own use
Activities of extraterritorial organizations and bodies                                                                       1              1
Gross loans                                                                                                             490,671        447,410
(Deferred expense)/unearned income                                                                                          227            394
Loans less (deferred expense)/unearned income                                                                           490,444        447,016
Less: Allowance for loan losses                                                                                           4,779          4,823
Total loans                                                                                                             485,665        442,193




                                                                                                                                          261
Deutsche Bank                                                          Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                     19 – Allowance for Credit Losses




19 – Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses consists of allowance for financial assets at amortized cost, financial assets at fair value
through OCI and off-balance sheet lending commitments and guarantee business.

Development of allowance for credit losses for financial assets at amortized cost
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                       Allowance for Credit Losses³
in €                                                                                   Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI⁴                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                                 544                  648                3,614                   139                4,946
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                                         (245)                  85                  615                   26                   480
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                               138                 (197)                  58                  N/M                     0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                                             N/M                   N/M                  N/M                  N/M                   N/M
Changes in models                                                                           0                     0                    0                    0                     0
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period²                                                                                      0                    0                 (561)                   (5)                (566)
Recovery of written off amounts                                                              0                    0                   55                    23                   78
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                           3                   (4)                 (41)                   (0)                 (43)
Balance, end of reporting period                                                           440                  532                3,740                   182                4,895
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk¹                                       (107)                (112)                 673                    26                  480
1
    Movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in creditworthiness and changes in models add up to Provision for Credit Losses excluding
    country risk.
2
    This position includes charge offs of allowance for credit losses.
3
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 4 million as of December 31, 2021.
4
    The total amount of undiscounted expected credit losses at initial recognition on financial assets that are purchased or originated credit-impaired initially recognized during the
    reporting period was € 0 million in 2021 and € 50 million in 2020.


Development of allowance for credit losses for financial assets at amortized cost
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                       Allowance for Credit Losses³
in €                                                                                   Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI⁴                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                                 549                  492                3,015                    36                4,093
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                                          (44)                 309                1,348                   72                 1,686
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                                77                 (125)                  49                  N/M                     0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                                             N/M                   N/M                  N/M                  N/M                   N/M
Changes in models                                                                           0                     0                    0                    0                     0
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period²                                                                                      0                    0                 (781)                    0                 (781)
Recovery of written off amounts                                                              0                    0                   58                     0                   58
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                         (38)                 (28)                 (75)                   31                 (110)
Balance, end of reporting period                                                           544                  648                3,614                   139                4,946
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk¹                                         33                  184                1,397                    72                1,686
1
    Movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in creditworthiness and changes in models add up to Provision for Credit Losses excluding
    country risk.
2
    This position includes charge offs of allowance for credit losses.
3
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 5 million as of December 31, 2020.
4
    The total amount of undiscounted expected credit losses at initial recognition on financial assets that are purchased or originated credit-impaired initially recognized during the
    reporting period was € 50 million in 2020 and € 0 million in 2019.




                                                                                                                                                                               262
Deutsche Bank                                                          Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                     19 – Allowance for Credit Losses




Development of allowance for credit losses for financial assets at amortized cost
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2019
                                                                                                                                                       Allowance for Credit Losses³
in €                                                                                   Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI⁴                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                                 509                  501                3,247                      3               4,259
Movements in financial assets including new business and
credit extensions                                                                          (57)                 102                  550                    40                  636
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                               120                 (106)                 (14)                                         0
Changes due to modifications that did not result in
derecognition                                                                             N/M                   N/M                  N/M                  N/M                   N/M
Changes in models                                                                           0                     0                    0                    0                     0
Financial assets that have been derecognized during the
period²                                                                                      0                    0                 (872)                   (26)               (898)
Recovery of written off amounts                                                              0                    0                   96                      0                  96
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                         (22)                  (4)                   8                     18                   0
Balance, end of reporting period                                                           549                  492                3,015                     36               4,093
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk¹                                         62                   (4)                 536                     40                 636
1
    Movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in creditworthiness and changes in models add up to Provision for Credit Losses excluding
    country risk.
2
    This position includes charge offs of allowance for credit losses.
3
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 3 million as of December 31, 2019.
4
    The total amount of undiscounted expected credit losses at initial recognition on financial assets that are purchased or originated credit-impaired initially recognized during the
    reporting period was € 0 million in 2019.


Allowance for credit losses for financial assets at fair value through OCI 1
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                        Allowance for Credit Losses
in € m.                                                                                Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3        Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Fair Value through OCI                                                                      15                    10                   16                     0                   41
1
    Allowance for credit losses against financial assets at fair value through OCI remained at very low levels (€ 20 million at December 31, 2020 and € 41 million as of
    December 31, 2021). Due to immateriality, we do not provide any details on the year-over-year development.


                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                        Allowance for Credit Losses
in € m.                                                                                Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3        Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Fair Value through OCI                                                                      12                     6                     2                    0                   20
1
    Allowance for credit losses against financial assets at fair value through OCI were almost unchanged at very low levels (€ 35 million at December 31, 2019 and € 20 million as
    of December 31, 2020). Due to immateriality, we do not provide any details on the year-over-year development.


                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2019
                                                                                                                                                        Allowance for Credit Losses
in € m.                                                                                Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3        Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Fair Value through OCI                                                                      16                     9                   10                     0                   35
1
    Allowance for credit losses against financial assets at fair value through OCI were almost unchanged at very low levels (€ 13 million at the beginning of year 2019 and
    € 35 million as of December 31, 2019, respectively). Due to immateriality, we do not provide any details on the year-over-year development.


Development of allowance for credit losses for off-balance sheet positions
                                                                                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                                       Allowance for Credit Losses2
in € m.                                                                                Stage 1               Stage 2              Stage 3        Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                                 144                   74                  200                      0                 419
Movements including new business                                                           (43)                  38                   18                      0                  13
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                                 3                   (5)                   2                      0                   0
Changes in models                                                                            0                    0                    0                      0                   0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                           3                    3                    6                      0                  12
Balance, end of reporting period                                                           108                  111                  225                      0                 443
  of which: Financial guarantees                                                            69                   64                  164                      0                 297
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk1                                        (40)                  33                   19                      0                  13
1
    The above table breaks down the impact on provision for credit losses from movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in
    creditworthiness and changes in models.
2
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 6 million as of December 31, 2021.




                                                                                                                                                                               263
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  20 – Transfer of Financial Assets, Assets Pledged and Received as Collateral




Development of allowance for credit losses for off-balance sheet positions
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                 Allowance for Credit Losses2
in € m.                                                                            Stage 1              Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                             128                   48                 166                    0                   342
Movements including new business                                                        13                   21                  41                    0                    75
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                             0                    0                  (1)                   0                     0
Changes in models                                                                        0                    0                   0                    0                     0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                       3                    4                  (6)                   0                     1
Balance, end of reporting period                                                       144                   74                 200                    0                   419
  of which: Financial guarantees                                                        99                   43                 115                    0                   257
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk1                                     13                   22                  40                    0                    75
1
    The above table breaks down the impact on provision for credit losses from movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in
    creditworthiness and changes in models.
2
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 4 million as of December 31, 2020.


Development of allowance for credit losses for off-balance sheet positions
                                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2019
                                                                                                                                                 Allowance for Credit Losses2
in € m.                                                                            Stage 1              Stage 2              Stage 3       Stage 3 POCI                   Total
Balance, beginning of year                                                             132                   73                  84                    0                   289
Movements including new business                                                       (13)                  (5)                 88                    0                    70
Transfers due to changes in creditworthiness                                             9                  (12)                  3                    0                     0
Changes in models                                                                        0                    0                   0                    0                     0
Foreign exchange and other changes                                                      (1)                  (7)                 (9)                   0                   (17)
Balance, end of reporting period                                                       128                   48                 166                    0                   342
  of which: Financial guarantees                                                        89                   30                 143                    0                   262
Provision for Credit Losses excluding country risk1                                     (4)                 (17)                 90                    0                    70
1
    The above table breaks down the impact on provision for credit losses from movements in financial assets including new business, transfers due to changes in
    creditworthiness and changes in models.
2
    Allowance for credit losses does not include allowance for country risk amounting to € 4 million as of December 31, 2019.




20 – Transfer of Financial Assets, Assets Pledged and Received
as Collateral
The Group enters into transactions in which it transfers financial assets held on the balance sheet and as a result may either
be eligible to derecognize the transferred asset in its entirety or must continue to recognize the transferred asset to the extent
of any continuing involvement, depending on certain criteria. These criteria are discussed in Note 1 “Significant Accounting
Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates”.

Where financial assets are not eligible to be derecognized, the transfers are viewed as secured financing transactions, with
any consideration received resulting in a corresponding liability. The Group is not entitled to use these financial assets for any
other purposes. The most common transactions of this nature entered into by the Group are repurchase agreements, securities
lending agreements and total return swaps, in which the Group retains substantially all of the associated credit, equity price,
interest rate and foreign exchange risks and rewards associated with the assets as well as the associated income streams.




                                                                                                                                                                         264
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  20 – Transfer of Financial Assets, Assets Pledged and Received as Collateral




Information on asset types and associated transactions that did not qualify for derecognition
in € m.                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021            Dec 31, 2020
Carrying amount of transferred assets
Trading securities not derecognized due to the following transactions:
  Repurchase agreements                                                                                                                          44,898                 40,654
  Securities lending agreements                                                                                                                   5,444                  8,951
  Total return swaps                                                                                                                              1,766                  1,319
  Other                                                                                                                                           4,028                  5,028
Total trading securities                                                                                                                         56,136                 55,953
Other trading assets                                                                                                                                244                    2152
Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                                                                         760                    666
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                                                                 5,642                  5,951
Loans at amortized cost1                                                                                                                             13                    210
Others                                                                                                                                              481                     72
Total                                                                                                                                            63,276                 63,0662
Carrying amount of associated liabilities                                                                                                        57,522                 53,348
¹ Loans where the associated liability is recourse only to the transferred assets had NIL carrying value and fair value as at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The
  associated liabilities had the same carrying value and fair value which resulted in a net position of 0.
2
  Prior year numbers have been restated following the reassessment of one trade


Carrying value of assets transferred in which the Group still accounts for the asset to the extent of its continuing involvement
in € m.                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021            Dec 31, 2020
Carrying amount of the original assets transferred
  Trading securities                                                                                                                                 1,050                1,039
  Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                       0                    0
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                                                                          308                  673
Carrying amount of the assets continued to be recognized
  Trading securities                                                                                                                                   61                    641
  Financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                      0                     0
  Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss                                                                          15                    17
Carrying amount of associated liabilities                                                                                                             102                   1221
¹ Prior year numbers have been restated following the reassessment of one trade.


The Group could retain some exposure to the future performance of a transferred asset either through new or existing
contractual rights and obligations and still be eligible to derecognize the asset. This ongoing involvement will be recognized
as a new instrument which may be different from the original financial asset that was transferred. Typical transactions include
retaining senior notes of non-consolidated securitizations to which originated loans have been transferred; financing
arrangements with structured entities to which the Group has sold a portfolio of assets; or sales of assets with credit-contingent
swaps. The Group’s exposure to such transactions is not considered to be significant as any substantial retention of risks
associated with the transferred asset will commonly result in an initial failure to derecognize. Transactions not considered to
result in an ongoing involvement include normal warranties on fraudulent activities that could invalidate a transfer in the event
of legal action, qualifying pass-through arrangements and standard trustee or administrative fees that are not linked to
performance.

The impact on the Group’s Balance Sheet of on-going involvement associated with transferred assets derecognized in full
                                                                                                                           Dec 31,2021                              Dec 31,2020
                                                                                                                             Maximum                                   Maximum
                                                                                                 Carrying                    Exposure     Carrying                     Exposure
in € m.                                                                                            value      Fair value      to Loss¹      value      Fair value       to Loss¹
Loans at amortized cost
  Securitization notes                                                                                283          302            302         254            271            271
  Other                                                                                                 0            0              0           7              7              7
Total loans at amortized cost                                                                         283          302            302         261            279            279
Financial assets held at fair value through profit or loss
  Securitization notes                                                                                 29           29             29           28            28             28
  Non-standard Interest Rate, cross-currency or inflation-linked swap                                 465          465            465            0             0              0
Total financial assets held at fair value through profit or loss                                      494          494            494           28            28             28
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income:
  Securitization notes                                                                               709           713            713         624            645            645
  Other                                                                                                0             0              0           0              0              0
Total financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                              709           713            713         624            645            645
Total financial assets representing on-going involvement                                           1,486         1,509          1,509         913            951            951
Financial liabilities held at fair value through profit or loss
  Non-standard Interest Rate, cross-currency or inflation-linked swap                                   8             8             0           11            11              0
Total financial liabilities representing on-going involvement                                           8             8             0           11            11              0
1
    The maximum exposure to loss is defined as the carrying value plus the notional value of any undrawn loan commitments not recognized as liabilities.




                                                                                                                                                                          265
Deutsche Bank                                                             Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                        20 – Transfer of Financial Assets, Assets Pledged and Received as Collateral




The impact on the Group’s Statement of Income of on-going involvement associated with transferred assets derecognized in full
                                                                                                                   Dec 31,2021                                  Dec 31,2020
                                                                                Year-to-         Cumulative          Gain/(loss)    Year-to-      Cumulative     Gain/(loss)
in € m.                                                                        date P&L               P&L            on disposal   date P&L            P&L       on disposal
Securitization notes                                                                 31                   81                 48          22               49             99
Non-standard Interest Rate, cross-currency or
inflation-linked swap                                                                41                   41                  0          (1)              (1)             0
Net gains/(losses) recognized from on-going
involvement in derecognized assets                                                   72                 123                  48          21               48             99


The Group pledges assets primarily as collateral against secured funding and for repurchase agreements, securities borrowing
agreements as well as other borrowing arrangements and for margining purposes on OTC derivative liabilities. Pledges are
generally conducted under terms that are usual and customary for standard securitized borrowing contracts and other
transactions described.

Carrying value of the Group’s assets pledged as collateral for liabilities or contingent liabilities 1
in € m.                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021     Dec 31, 2020
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                              51,165           47,553
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                                                                   6,395            7,858
Loans                                                                                                                                              79,485           77,433
Other                                                                                                                                                 611            1,257
Total                                                                                                                                             137,656          134,101
1
    Excludes assets pledged as collateral from transactions that do not result in liabilities or contingent liabilities.


Total assets pledged to creditors available for sale or repledge1
in € m.                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021     Dec 31, 2020
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                                                                              48,426           44,210
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                                                                   5,252            4,911
Loans                                                                                                                                               2,073            2,232
Other                                                                                                                                                 481               72
Total                                                                                                                                              56,233           51,426
1
    Includes assets pledged as collateral from transactions that do not result in liabilities or contingent liabilities.


The Group receives collateral primarily in reverse repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements, derivatives
transactions, customer margin loans and other transactions. These transactions are generally conducted under terms that are
usual and customary for standard secured lending activities and the other transactions described. The Group, as the secured
party, has the right to sell or re-pledge such collateral, subject to the Group returning equivalent securities upon completion of
the transaction. This right is used primarily to cover short sales, securities loaned and securities sold under repurchase
agreements.

Fair Value of collateral received
in € m.                                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2021     Dec 31, 2020
Securities and other financial assets accepted as collateral                                                                                      260,003          237,157
  Of which:
  Collateral sold or repledged                                                                                                                    222,232          199,346




                                                                                                                                                                      266
Deutsche Bank                                             Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                        21 – Property and Equipment




21 – Property and Equipment
                                                                                                          Property and   Right-of-use for
                              Owner occupied    Furniture and        Leasehold      Construction-in-        equipment     leased assets
in € m.                            properties     equipment       improvements            progress      owned (IAS 16)         (IFRS 16)      Total
Cost of acquisition:
Balance as of January 1,
                                        656           2,380              2,961                 155              6,153             3,533      9,686
2020
Changes in the group of
                                           0              (1)                 0                     0              (1)                (1)       (3)
consolidated companies
Additions                                  2            128                 47                 335                512             1,806      2,317
Transfers                                  8            173                 43                 (97)               127              (388)      (261)
Reclassifications (to)/from
                                         (73)            (65)                 0                  (1)             (139)                (0)     (139)
“held for sale”
Disposals                                  2            223                  96                   0               321                 41       362
Exchange rate changes                     (4)           (50)                (58)                 (5)             (117)               (64)     (181)
Balance as of December
                                        587           2,343              2,897                 387              6,214             4,844     11,058
31, 2020
Changes in the group of
                                          (1)              0                  0                     0              (1)                 0        (1)
consolidated companies
Additions                                  0            113                 46                 391                550               254       804
Transfers                                 58             (8)               354                (321)                83               367       451
Reclassifications (to)/from
                                        (131)            (16)               (94)                 (1)             (241)                 0      (241)
“held for sale”
Disposals                                  0            187                146                   79               412               165       578
Exchange rate changes                      1             38                 45                   21               105               139       244
Balance as of December
                                        514           2,283              3,102                 398              6,297             5,439     11,737
31, 2021
Accumulated depreciation
and impairment:
Balance as of January 1,
                                        325           1,841              1,927                      0           4,093               663      4,756
2020
Changes in the group of
                                           0              (1)                 0                     0              (1)                 0        (1)
consolidated companies
Depreciation                              16            171                187                      0             373               648      1,021
Impairment losses                          5              2                  8                      0              16                77         93
Reversals of impairment
                                           3               0                  0                     0               3                10         12
losses
Transfers                                  2            145                   2                     0             149                  5      153
Reclassifications (to)/from
                                         (25)            (53)                 0                     0             (78)                 0       (78)
“held for sale”
Disposals                                  1            206                  89                     0             296                 11       307
Exchange rate changes                     (3)           (42)                (45)                    0             (90)               (24)     (114)
Balance as of December
                                        317           1,856              1,989                      0           4,163             1,347      5,510
31, 2020
Changes in the group of
                                          (1)              0                  0                     0              (1)                 0        (1)
consolidated companies
Depreciation                              16            140                204                      0             360               631       991
Impairment losses                         12              7                 39                      1              59                99       158
Reversals of impairment
                                           0               0                  0                     0               0                18         18
losses
Transfers                                 57              16                10                      0              84                  2        85
Reclassifications (to)/from
                                        (115)            (15)               (62)                    0            (191)                 0      (191)
“held for sale”
Disposals                                  0            178                125                      0             303               133       436
Exchange rate changes                      1             34                 39                      0              74                29       103
Balance as of December
                                        288           1,860              2,095                      1           4,244             1,957      6,201
31, 2021

Carrying amount:
Balance as of December
                                        270             487                908                 387              2,051             3,497      5,549
31, 2020
Balance as of December
                                        226             423              1,007                 398              2,054             3,482      5,536
31, 2021


Depreciation expenses, impairment losses and reversal of impairment losses on property and equipment are recorded within
general and administrative expenses for the income statement.

The carrying value of items of property and equipment on which there is a restriction on sale was € 22 million and € 23 million
as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.




                                                                                                                                             267
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                22 – Leases




Commitments for the acquisition of property and equipment were € 35 million at year-end 2021 and € 27 million at year-end
2020.

The Group leases many assets including land and buildings, vehicles and IT equipment for which it records right-of-use assets.
During 2021, additions to right-of-use assets amounted to € 254 million and largely reflected new real estate leases.
Depreciation charges of € 631 million recognized in 2021 mainly resulted from planned consumption of right-of-use assets for
property leases over their contractual terms. The carrying amount of right-of-use assets of € 3.5 billion included in Total
Property and equipment as of December 31, 2021 predominantly represented leased properties of € 3.5 billion and vehicle
leases of € 11 million. For more information on the Group´s leased properties and related disclosures required under IFRS 16,
please refer to Note 22 “Leases”.


22 – Leases
The Group’s disclosures are as a lessee under lease arrangements covering property and equipment. The Group has applied
judgement in presenting related information pursuant to IFRS 16 in a manner that it considers to be most relevant to an
understanding of its financial performance and position.

The Group leases many assets including land and buildings, vehicles and IT equipment. The Group is a lessee for the majority
of its offices and branches under long-term rental agreements. Most of the lease contracts are made under usual terms and
conditions, which means they include options to extend the lease by a defined amount of time, price adjustment clauses and
escalation clauses in line with general office rental market conditions. However, the lease agreements do not include any
clauses that impose any restriction on the Group’s ability to pay dividends, engage in debt financing transactions or enter into
further lease agreements.

As of December 31, 2021 (December 31, 2020), the Group recorded right-of-use assets on its balance sheet with a carrying
amount of € 3.5 billion (€ 3.5 billion), which are included in Property and equipment. The right-of-use assets predominantly
represented leased properties of € 3.5 billion (€ 3.5 billion) and vehicle leases of € 11 million (€ 12 million). For more
information on the year-to-date development of right-of-use assets, please refer to Note 21 “Property and Equipment”.

Corresponding to the recognition of the right-of-use assets, as of December 31, 2021 (December 31, 2020), the Group
recorded lease liabilities on its balance sheet with a carrying amount of € 4.0 billion (€ 4.0 billion), which are included in Other
liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, the lease liabilities included the discounted value of future lease payments of € 495 million
for the Group headquarters in Frankfurt am Main that was sold and leased back on December 1, 2011. The contract was
extended in the fourth quarter 2021 with a fixed term until the end of 2036 and includes two options to extend the lease for
two additional 5-year periods up to the end of 2046.

During 2021 and 2020, interest expenses recorded from the compounding of the lease liabilities amounted to € 86 million and
€ 79 million, respectively. The contractual maturities for the undiscounted cash flows from these liabilities are shown in Note 31
“Maturity Analysis of the earliest contractual undiscounted cash flows of Financial Liabilities”.

Expenses recognized in 2021 (2020) relating to short-term leases and leases of low-value assets, for which the Group decided
to apply the recognition exemption under IFRS 16 (and thus not to record right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities
on the balance sheet), amounted to € 2 million (€ 7 million) and € 0 million (€ 2 million), respectively.

Income recorded in 2021 (2020) from the subletting of right-of-use assets totaled € 34 million (€ 24 million).

The total cash outflow for leases for 2021 (2020) was € 767 million (€ 729 million) and represented mainly expenditures made
for real estate rentals over € 754 million (€ 708 million). Of the total cash outflow amount, payments of € 679 million
(€ 653 million) were made for the principal portion of lease liabilities, payments of € 87 million (€ 77 million) were made for the
interest portion.

Total future cash outflows to which the Group as a lessee is potentially exposed, that are not reflected in the measurement of
the lease liabilities, mainly include potential payment exposures arising from extension options (2021: € 5.3 billion) and future
payments for leases not yet commenced, but to which the Group is committed (2021: € 1.1 billion). Their expected maturities
are shown in the table below.




                                                                                                                              268
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  23 – Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets




Future cash outflows to which the Group is potentially exposed that are not reflected in the measurement of lease liabilities
in € m.                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020
Future cash outflows not reflected in lease liabilities:
  Not later than one year                                                                                                                          10                50
  Later than one year and not later than five years                                                                                               539               791
  Later than five years                                                                                                                         5,849             5,097
Future cash outflows not reflected in lease liabilities                                                                                         6,398             5,938




23 – Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Changes in Goodwill

The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill, as well as gross amounts and accumulated impairment losses of goodwill,
for the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, are shown below by cash-generating units (“CGU”).

The Group’s business operations are organized under the following divisional structure: the Core Bank, which includes the
Corporate Bank (“CB”), Investment Bank (“IB”), Private Bank (“PB”) and Asset Management (“AM”) corporate divisions and
the Capital Release Unit (“CRU”). The CB, IB, PB and the AM corporate divisions as well as the CRU each are considered
cash-generating units (CGUs).

Please also refer to Note 4 “Business Segments and Related Information” for more information regarding changes in the
presentation of segment disclosures.

Goodwill allocated to cash-generating units
                                                                                                                                  Asset
                                                                                             Investment         Corporate       Manage-
in € m.                                                                                            Bank             Bank           ment      Private Bank          Total
Balance as of January 1, 2020                                                                         0                 0        2,881                 0         2,881
Goodwill acquired during the year                                                                     0                 0            0                 0             0
Purchase accounting adjustments                                                                       0                 0            0                 0             0
Transfers                                                                                             0                 0            0                 0             0
Reclassification from (to) “held for sale”                                                            0                 0            0                 0             0
Goodwill related to dispositions without being classified as “held for sale”                          0                 0            0                 0             0
Impairment losses1                                                                                    0                 0            0                 0             0
Exchange rate changes/other                                                                           0                 0         (142)                0          (142)
Balance as of December 31, 2020                                                                       0                 0        2,739                 0         2,739
Gross amount of goodwill                                                                          3,608               569        3,197             3,698        11,073
Accumulated impairment losses                                                                    (3,608)             (569)        (458)           (3,698)       (8,334)
Balance as of January 1, 2021                                                                         0                 0        2,739                 0         2,739
Goodwill acquired during the year                                                                     0                 5            0                 0             5
Purchase accounting adjustments                                                                       0                 0            0                 0             0
Transfers                                                                                             0                 0            0                 0             0
Reclassification from (to) “held for sale”                                                            0                 0          (56)                0           (56)
Goodwill related to dispositions without being classified as “held for sale”                          0                 0            0                 0             0
Impairment losses1                                                                                    0                (5)           0                 0            (5)
Exchange rate changes/other                                                                           0                 0          123                 0           123
Balance as of December 31, 2021                                                                       0                 0        2,806                 0         2,806
Gross amount of goodwill                                                                          3,854               602        3,295             3,716        11,467
Accumulated impairment losses                                                                    (3,854)             (602)        (489)           (3,716)       (8,662)

1
    Impairment losses of goodwill are recorded as impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets in the income statement.


Changes in goodwill in 2021 mainly included the reclassification of € 56 million of AM goodwill to assets held for sale, following
the designated sale of DWS’ digital investment platform to a joint venture with BlackFin (see Note 24). Following the acquisition
of a payment service provider (Better Payment Germany GmbH) in September 2021 (see Note 3), as part of the purchase
price allocation the Group had initially recorded goodwill of € 5 million assigned to the CB CGU. Given the specific valuation
of the CB CGU with a continued shortfall of its recoverable amount versus its carrying amount, the newly acquired goodwill
was considered impaired and fully written off in 2021.

Changes in goodwill in 2020 solely related to foreign exchange rate movements of AM goodwill held in non-Group currencies.




                                                                                                                                                                  269
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                              23 – Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets




Changes in goodwill in 2019 were mainly driven by the transformational measures relating to the Group’s businesses and its
reorganization. Triggered by the impact of a lowered outlook on business plans driven both by adjustments to macro-economic
factors as well as by the impact of strategic decisions in preparation of the transformation announcement, in the second quarter
2019 the Group reviewed the recoverable amounts of its CGUs in the then existing structure. This review resulted in a short-
fall of the recoverable amounts against the then existing respective CGUs carrying amounts for WM within the former Private
& Commercial Bank (“PCB”) corporate division and GTB & CF within the former Corporate & Investment Bank (“CIB”)
corporate division.

With a recoverable amount of approximately € 1.9 billion for WM, goodwill in former CGU WM (€ 545 million) was impaired
and had to be fully written-off, mainly as a result of worsening macro-economic assumptions, including interest rate curves,
as well as industry-specific market growth corrections for the WM business globally. For former CGU GTB & CF, the
recoverable amount of approximately € 10.2 billion led to the full impairment of allocated goodwill (€ 491 million). This was
mainly driven by adverse industry trends in Corporate Finance as well as by adjustments to macro-economic assumptions,
including interest rate curves. The total impairment charges of € 1.0 billion were recorded in Impairment of goodwill and other
intangible assets of the respective Private Bank (here: WM CGU; € 545 million) and Corporate Bank (€ 491 million) segment
results of the second quarter of 2019.

Goodwill Impairment Test

For the purposes of impairment testing, goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to CGUs. On the basis as
described in Note 1 “Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates”, the Group’s primary CGUs are as
outlined above. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually in the fourth quarter by comparing the recoverable amount of each
goodwill-carrying CGU with its carrying amount. In addition, in accordance with IAS 36, the Group tests goodwill whenever a
triggering event is identified. The recoverable amount is the higher of a CGU’s fair value less costs of disposal and its value
in use.

Following the aforementioned write-off of goodwill in the former GTB & CF CGUs in the second quarter 2019 and the de-
recognition of ring-fenced goodwill included in the disposal of a nonintegrated subsidiary recorded in the third quarter 2019,
the AM CGU was the only goodwill carrying CGU to be tested for annual impairment in 2019, 2020 and 2021. The annual
goodwill impairment tests conducted in these periods did not result in an impairment loss on the Group’s primary goodwill-
carrying CGU as the recoverable amounts of the AM CGU were higher than the respective carrying amounts.

A review of the Group’s strategy or certain political or global risks for the banking industry, uncertainties regarding the
implementation of already adopted regulation and the introduction of legislation that is already under discussion could result
in an impairment of goodwill in the future.

Carrying Amount

The carrying amount of a primary CGU is derived using a capital allocation model based on the Shareholders’ Equity Allocation
Framework of the Group (please refer to Note 4, “Business Segments and Related Information” for more details). The
allocation uses the Group’s total equity at the date of valuation, including Additional Tier 1 Notes (“AT1 Notes”), which
constitute unsecured and subordinated notes of Deutsche Bank and which are classified as Additional equity components in
accordance with IFRS. Total equity is adjusted for an add-on adjustment for goodwill attributable to noncontrolling interests.

Recoverable Amount

The Group determines the recoverable amounts of its primary CGUs on the basis of the higher of value in use and fair value
less costs of disposal (Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy). It employs a discounted cash flow (DCF) model, which reflects the
specifics of the banking business and its regulatory environment. The model calculates the present value of the estimated
future earnings that are distributable to shareholders after fulfilling the respective regulatory capital requirements. The
recoverable amounts also include the fair value of the AT1 Notes, allocated to the primary CGUs consistent to their treatment
in the carrying amount.

The DCF model uses earnings projections and respective capitalization assumptions based on five-year financial plans as
well as longer term expectations on the impact of regulatory developments, which are discounted to their present value.
Estimating future earnings and capital requirements involves judgment and the consideration of past and current performances
as well as expected developments in the respective markets, and in the overall macroeconomic and regulatory environments.
Earnings projections beyond the initial five-year period are, where applicable, adjusted to derive a sustainable level. In case
of a going concern, the cash flow to equity is assumed to increase by or converge towards a constant long-term growth rate
for the AM CGU of up to 2.7 % (2020: up to 3.1 %). This is based on projected revenue forecasts of the CGU as well as
expectations for the development of gross domestic product and inflation and is captured in the terminal value.




                                                                                                                          270
Deutsche Bank                                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                 23 – Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets




Key Assumptions and Sensitivities

Key Assumptions: The DCF value of a CGU is sensitive to the earnings projections, to the discount rate (cost of equity) applied
and, to a lesser extent, to the long-term growth rate. The discount rates applied have been determined based on the capital
asset pricing model and comprise a risk-free interest rate, a market risk premium and a factor covering the systematic market
risk (beta factor). The values for the risk-free interest rate, the market risk premium and the beta factors are determined using
external sources of information. CGU-specific beta factors are determined based on a respective group of peer companies.
Variations in all of these components might impact the discount rates. For the AM CGU, the discount rates (after tax) applied
for 2021 and 2020 were 9.1 % and 9.8 %, respectively.

Management determined the values for the key assumptions in the following table based on a combination of internal and
external analysis. Estimates for efficiency and the cost reduction program are based on progress made to date and scheduled
future projects and initiatives.

Primary goodwill-
carrying cash-                                                                                       Uncertainty associated with key assumptions and potential
generating unit          Description of key assumptions                                              events/circumstances that could have a negative effect
                           — Deliver strong investment product performance                             — Challenging market environment and volatility
                           — Expand product suite in growth areas (e.g. alternatives,                    unfavorable to our investment strategies
                             multi assets, passive, ESG investment schemes) while                      — Unfavorable margin development and adverse
                             consolidating non-core strategies                                           competition levels in key markets and products beyond
                           — Consistent net flows leveraging market share leadership in                  expected levels
                             Germany and the rest of Europe, while expanding                           — Business/execution risks, e.g., underachievement of net
                             coverage in Asia Pacific and focused growth in the                          flow targets from market uncertainty, loss of high-quality
                             Americas                                                                    client facing employees, unfavorable investment
Asset Management
                           — Diversification of intermediary coverage towards high                       performance, lower than expected efficiency gains
                             growth channels and deployment of digital solutions to                    — Uncertainty around regulation and its potential
                             serve new channels                                                          implications not yet anticipated
                           — Further efficiency through improved core operating
                             processes, platform optimization and product
                             rationalization
                           — Anticipation of further headwinds in the asset management
                             industry as a result of the changing regulatory environment


Sensitivities: In order to test the resilience of the recoverable amount, key assumptions used in the DCF model (for example,
the discount rate and the earnings projections) are sensitized. Management believes that reasonable possible changes in key
assumptions could cause an impairment loss in AM. Currently, in AM the recoverable amount exceeds the carrying amount
by 32 % / € 2.1 billion.

Change in certain key assumptions to cause the recoverable amount to equal the carrying amount
Change in Key Assumptions                                                                                                                                           AM
Discount rate (post tax) increase
  from                                                                                                                                                            9.1 %
  to                                                                                                                                                             11.3 %
Change in projected future earnings in each period by                                                                                                            21.1 %
Long term growth rate                                                                                                                                               N/M

N/M – Not meaningful, as a rate of 0 % would still lead to a recoverable amount in excess of the carrying amount.




                                                                                                                                                                  271
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                   23 – Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets




Other Intangible Assets
Changes of other intangible assets by asset classes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
                                                                                                                                                      Internally
                                                                                                                                                     generated       Total other
                                                                                                                                                     intangible       intangible
                                                                                                                  Purchased intangible assets            assets           assets
                                                                Unamortized                                                         Amortized        Amortized
                                                                       Total                                                              Total
                                     Retail                     unamortized       Customer-          Contract-                       amortized
                                investment                       purchased            related           based        Software       purchased
                              management                          intangible       intangible       intangible            and        intangible
in € m.                        agreements             Other           assets           assets           assets           other           assets       Software
Cost of acquisition/
manufacture:
Balance as of
                                      1,030             442            1,472           1,403               70             625            2,098           7,512           11,082
January 1, 2020
Additions                                 0                0               0                5               0             138              143             911            1,054
Changes in the group of
consolidated companies                    0                0               0                0               0                0               0                0                  0
Disposals                                 0                0               0                0               0                5               5             390                 394
Reclassifications from
(to) “held for sale”                      0                0               0                0               0              (37)            (37)              (9)               (46)
Transfers                                 0                0               0                0               0              60               60               21                 81
Exchange rate changes                   (85)              (1)            (86)             (53)              0               (2)            (55)            (136)           (277)
Balance as of
                                       945              441            1,386           1,356               70             778            2,204           7,910           11,499
December 31, 2020
Additions                                 0                0               0              13                0              22               35           1,106            1,141
Changes in the group of
consolidated companies                    0                0               0                0               0                0               0                5                  4
Disposals                                 0                0               0                0               0              12               12               86                 98
Reclassifications from
(to) “held for sale”                      0                0               0                0               0                0               0              (40)               (40)
Transfers                                 0                0               0               (5)              0                0               (5)             (1)                (6)
Exchange rate changes                    71                1              72              34                0                1              35             125                 231
Balance as of
                                      1,017             440            1,457           1,398               70             789            2,257           9,018           12,732
December 31, 2021
Accumulated amortization
and impairment:
Balance as of
                                       260              440              700           1,384               70             528            1,982           4,254            6,935
January 1, 2020
Amortization for the year                 0                0               0                8               0              37               45             994            1,0401
Changes in the group of
consolidated companies                    0                0               0                0               0                0               0                0                  0
Disposals                                 0                0               0                0               0                3               3             385                 388
Reclassifications from
(to) “held for sale”                      0                0               0                0               0              (33)            (33)              (8)               (41)
Impairment losses                         0                0               0                0               0                0               0               50                 512
Reversals of impairment
                                          0                0               0                0               0                0               0                2                  23
losses
Transfers                                 0                0               0                0               0             106              106              (22)                84
Exchange rate changes                   (22)               0             (22)             (52)              0               (2)            (54)             (88)           (165)
Balance as of
                                       239              439              678           1,340               70             633            2,043           4,793            7,513
December 31, 2020
Amortization for the year                 0                0               0                6               0              37               43             974            1,0174
Changes in the group of
consolidated companies                    0                0               0                0               0                0               0                0                 (1)
Disposals                                 0                0               0                0               0              12               12               85                 97
Reclassifications from
                                          0                0               0                0               0                0               0               (9)                (9)
(to) “held for sale”
Impairment losses                         0                0               0                3               0                0               3             149                 1525
Reversals of impairment
                                          0                0               0                0               0                0               0                0                  0
losses
Transfers                                 0                0               0                0               0                3               3                0                  2
Exchange rate changes                    18                0              18              34                0                1              35               83                136
Balance as of
                                       257              439              696           1,383               70             662            2,115           5,904            8,714
December 31, 2021
Carrying amount:
As of December 31, 2020                706                 2             708              16                0             145              161           3,117            3,986
As of December 31, 2021                760                 1             761              15                0             128              143           3,114            4,018
1
    € 1.0 billion were included in general and administrative expenses.
2
    € 51 million were mainly comprised of impairments of self-developed software recorded in general and administrative expenses.
3
    € 2 million were comprised of reversal of impairments of self-developed software recorded in general and administrative expenses.
4
    € 1.0 billion were included in general and administrative expenses.
5
    € 152 million were comprised of impairments of € 149 million on self-developed software and of € 3 million on customer-related intangibles, both recorded in general and
    administrative expenses.




                                                                                                                                                                          272
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                 23 – Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets




Amortizing Intangible Assets

In 2021, amortizing other intangible assets remained nearly unchanged, decreasing only slightly by net € 21 million. This
reflects amortization expenses of € 1.0 billion, mostly for the scheduled consumption of capitalized software (€ 1.0 billion) and
the impairment of current platform software as well as software under construction (€ 149 million). More information in regards
to the related impact from the transformation strategy is included in Note 45 “Impact of Deutsche Bank’s transformation”.
Additions to internally generated intangible assets of € 1.1 billion resulting from the capitalization of expenses incurred in
conjunction with the Group’s development of own-used software compensated for the decrease in net book value. A weaker
Euro exchange rate against major currencies accounted for positive exchange rate changes of € 42 million.

In 2020, amortizing other intangible assets decreased by € 161 million. This reduction was driven by amortization expenses
of € 1.0 billion, mostly for the scheduled consumption of capitalized software (€ 1.0 billion) and the impairment of current
platform software as well as software under construction (€ 50 million). Additions to internally generated intangible assets of
€ 1.1 billion resulting from the capitalization of expenses incurred in conjunction with the Group’s development of own -used
software compensated for the decrease in net book value. A stronger Euro exchange rate against major currencies accounted
for negative exchange rate changes of € 112 million.

In 2019, amortizing other intangible assets decreased by a net € 1.1 billion. This was mainly driven by amortization expenses
of € 1.3 billion, mostly for the scheduled consumption of capitalized software (€ 1.2 billion) and the impairment of current
platform software as well as software under construction (€ 937 million). Offsetting were additions to internally generated
intangible assets of € 1.0 billion resulting from the capitalization of expenses incurred in conjunction with the Group’s
development of own-used software. Furthermore, the weakening of the Euro against major currencies accounted for positive
exchange rate changes of € 26 million.

Other intangible assets with finite useful lives are generally amortized over their useful lives based on the straight-line method.

Useful lives of other amortized intangible assets by asset class
                                                                                                                        Useful lives
                                                                                                                           in years
Internally generated intangible assets:
Software                                                                                                                  up to 10
Purchased intangible assets:
Customer-related intangible assets                                                                                        up to 20
Other                                                                                                                     up to 10


Unamortized Intangible Assets

Within this asset class, the Group recognizes certain contract-based and marketing-related intangible assets, which are
deemed to have an indefinite useful life.

In particular, the asset class comprises the below detailed investment management agreements related to retail mutual funds
and certain trademarks. Due to the specific nature of these intangible assets, market prices are ordinarily not observable and,
therefore, the Group values such assets based on the income approach, using a post-tax DCF-methodology.

Retail investment management agreements: These assets, amounting to € 760 million, relate to the Group’s U.S. retail mutual
fund business and are allocated to the AM CGU. Retail investment management agreements are contracts that give AM the
exclusive right to manage a variety of mutual funds for a specified period. Since these contracts are easily renewable, the cost
of renewal is minimal, and they have a long history of renewal, these agreements are not expected to have a foreseeable limit
on the contract period. Therefore, the rights to manage the associated assets under management are expected to generate
cash flows for an indefinite period of time. This intangible asset was recorded at fair value based upon a valuation provided
by a third party at the date of acquisition of Zurich Scudder Investments, Inc. in 2002.

The recoverable amount was calculated as fair value less costs of disposal using the multi-period excess earnings method
and the fair value measurement was categorized as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy and is essentially flat compared to the
carrying amount. The key assumptions in determining the fair value less costs of disposal include the asset mix, the flows
forecast, the effective fee rate and discount rate as well as the terminal value growth rate. The discount rate (cost of equi ty)
applied in the calculation was 9.8 % in 2021 (10.3 % in 2020). The terminal value growth rate applied for 2021 is 4.1 % (for
2020 4.1 %). The reviews of the valuations for the years 2021 and 2020 neither resulted in any impairment nor a reversal of
prior impairments.




                                                                                                                             273
Deutsche Bank                                                Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                           24 – Non-Current Assets and Disposal Groups Held for Sale




24 – Non-Current Assets and Disposal Groups Held for Sale
Within the balance sheet, non-current assets and disposal groups held for sale are included in other assets and other liabilities.



in € m.                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Cash and bank balances                                                                                                             6              0
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                                                              0          6,086
Property and equipment                                                                                                             9             11
Goodwill and other intangible assets                                                                                              88              0
Other assets                                                                                                                     296              0
Total assets classified as held for sale                                                                                         398          6,097

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                                                         0          2,000
Other liabilities                                                                                                                252          7,850
Total liabilities classified as held for sale                                                                                    252          9,850


As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, no unrealized gains (losses) relating to non-current assets classified as
held for sale were recognized directly in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (net of tax).

DWS Partners with BlackFin to Unlock Full Potential of Digital Investment Platform IKS

In September 2021, DWS Group (“DWS”) and BlackFin Capital Partners (“BlackFin”) have agreed on a long-term strategic
partnership to jointly evolve the digital investment platform into a platform eco system that provides comprehensive digital
investment solutions and services to distribution partners, institutional investors and retail clients. It was agreed that DWS will
transfer its digital investment platform into a joint venture with BlackFin, maintaining a stake of 30 %. As of December 31,
2021, the Group classified the related assets and liabilities in the transaction perimeter as a disposal group held for sale in
Asset Management. The remeasurement to the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell of these assets and
liabilities did not result in the recognition of an impairment loss. Closing of the transaction is expected for the second ha lf of
2022.

Transfer of Global Prime Finance & Electronic Equities platform to BNP Paribas completed

As part of the Group’s strategic transformation and restructuring plans announced on July 7, 2019, the Management Board of
Deutsche Bank had announced the exit of the Equities Sales & Trading business. In this context, Deutsche Bank had entered
into an agreement with BNP Paribas S.A. (“BNP Paribas “) to provide continuity of service to its prime finance and electronic
equities clients, with a view to transferring technology and staff to BNP Paribas and to continue to operate the platfor m until
clients are migrated to BNP Paribas, with revenues transferred to BNP Paribas and certain costs to be refunded to Deutsche
Bank. On November 14, 2019, BNP Paribas and Deutsche Bank announced that the agreement to refer clients and to transfer
technology and key staff from the respective businesses to BNP Paribas had received the necessary approvals and was
therefore considered unconditional. The revenue transfer and cost reimbursement arrangement commenced on December 1,
2019. Accordingly, in the fourth quarter 2019, the assets (€ 5.0 billion) and liabilities (€ 9.6 billion) forming the transaction
perimeter were classified as assets and liabilities held for sale of the Capital Release Unit (CRU). As of December 31, 2020,
the disposal group was comprised of assets and liabilities amounting to € 6.1 billion and € 9.9 billion, respectively.

The Group and BNP Paribas have announced on January 5, 2022 that the transfer of clients, technology and key staff from
Deutsche Bank’s Global Prime Finance and Electronic Equities businesses to BNP Paribas has been successfully completed
by the end of 2021, in line with the targeted timeline. With this, Deutsche Bank has achieved a key milestone in its ongoing
transformation.

Agreement to sell the Italian financial advisors network to Zurich Italy

In August 2021, Deutsche Bank and Zurich Insurance Group Italy (“Zurich Italy”) have reached an agreement wherein Zurich
Italy will acquire Deutsche Bank’s Financial Advisors Network in Italy. The transaction is subject to outstanding substantive
regulatory approvals and therefore was not considered a disposal group held for sale at year-end 2021. Closing is expected
for the second half of 2022.




                                                                                                                                              274
Deutsche Bank                                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                 26 – Deposits




Disposals in 2020

Division                        Disposal                                                 Financial impact1                               Date of the disposal
Infrastructure                  On November 9, 2020, Deutsche Bank had                   Negative pre-tax impact of € (120) million       Fourth quarter 2020.
                                announced the sale of its subsidiary Postbank            recorded in the fourth quarter 2020 within other
                                Systems AG, including its                                revenues (€ (104) million) and non-interest
                                around 1,500 employees, to Tata Consultancy              expenses (€ (16) million).
                                Services (TCS). Following the fulfilment of all
                                closing conditions achieved in the fourth
                                quarter 2020, TCS acquired Postbank Systems
                                AG and accordingly the subsidiary was
                                deconsolidated at year-end 2020.

1
    Impairment losses and reversals of impairment losses are included in Other income.




25 – Other Assets and Other Liabilities
in € m.                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020
Brokerage and securities related receivables
  Cash/margin receivables                                                                                                                48,675              58,714
  Receivables from prime brokerage                                                                                                            5                  41
  Pending securities transactions past settlement date                                                                                    3,579               2,752
  Receivables from unsettled regular way trades                                                                                          19,236              13,057
Total brokerage and securities related receivables                                                                                       71,495              74,564
Debt Securities held to collect                                                                                                          14,800              12,587
Accrued interest receivable                                                                                                               2,084               1,656
Assets held for sale                                                                                                                        398               6,097
Other                                                                                                                                    15,008              15,495
Total other assets                                                                                                                      103,785             110,399


in € m.                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020
Brokerage and securities related payables
  Cash/margin payables                                                                                                                    52,875             66,259
  Payables from prime brokerage                                                                                                              583                271
  Pending securities transactions past settlement date                                                                                     1,549              1,612
  Payables from unsettled regular way trades                                                                                              15,158             11,668
Total brokerage and securities related payables                                                                                           70,165             79,810
Accrued interest payable                                                                                                                   1,625              1,740
Liabilities held for sale                                                                                                                    252              9,850
Lease liabilities                                                                                                                          3,965              3,974
Other                                                                                                                                     21,789             18,834
Total other liabilities                                                                                                                   97,796            114,208


For further details on the assets and liabilities held for sale, please refer to Note 24 “Non-Current Assets and Disposal Groups
Held for Sale”.


26 – Deposits
in € m.                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020
Noninterest-bearing demand deposits                                                                                                     225,782             220,646
Interest-bearing deposits
   Demand deposits                                                                                                                      167,590             154,790
   Time deposits                                                                                                                        122,478             106,551
   Savings deposits                                                                                                                      87,901              86,044
Total interest-bearing deposits                                                                                                         377,969             347,385
Total deposits                                                                                                                          603,750             568,031




                                                                                                                                                                275
Deutsche Bank                                                        Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                   27 – Provisions




27 – Provisions
Movements by Class of Provisions
                                                                                 Operational              Civil    Regulatory              Re-
in € m.                                                                                 Risk        Litigation    Enforcement       structuring          Other            Total1
Balance as of January 1, 2020                                                            119             544              543             684              384           2,276
Changes in the group of consolidated companies                                             0               0               (0)             (0)              (3)             (4)
New provisions                                                                            20             107              183             553              505           1,368
Amounts used                                                                              11             182              165             641              401           1,400
Unused amounts reversed                                                                   39             106               27             105               84             361
Effects from exchange rate fluctuations/Unwind of discount                                 0              (9)             (41)              4              (15)            (60)
Transfers                                                                                 (0)              0               (1)            181                8             189
Balance as of December 31, 2020                                                           89             355              492             676              396           2,007
Changes in the group of consolidated companies                                             0               0                0               0                2               2
New provisions                                                                            62             475              110             302              641           1,590
Amounts used                                                                               2             112              113             339              470           1,036
Unused amounts reversed                                                                  106              78               40              58              151             434
Effects from exchange rate fluctuations/Unwind of discount                                 0               6               26               1                7              40
Transfers                                                                                 (0)             (1)               0              (0)              24              22
Balance as of December 31, 2021                                                           42             644              475             582              448           2,192
1
    For the remaining portion of provisions as disclosed on the consolidated balance sheet, please see Note 19 “Allowance for Credit Losses”, in which allowances for credit
    related off-balance sheet positions are disclosed.



Classes of Provisions
Operational Risk provisions arise out of operational risk and exclude civil litigation and regulatory enforcement provisions,
which are presented as separate classes of provisions. Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed
internal processes, people and systems, or from external events. The definition used for the purposes of determining
operational provisions differs from the risk management definition, as it excludes risk of loss resulting from civil litigation and
regulatory enforcement matters. For risk management purposes, operational risk includes legal risk, as payments to
customers, counterparties and regulatory bodies in civil litigations or regulatory enforcement matters constitute loss events for
operational shortcomings, but excludes business and reputational risk.

Civil Litigation provisions arise out of current or potential claims or proceedings alleging non-compliance with contractual or
other legal or regulatory responsibilities, which have resulted or may result in demands from customers, counterparties or
other parties in civil litigations.

Regulatory Enforcement provisions arise out of current or potential claims or proceedings alleging non-compliance with legal
or regulatory responsibilities, which have resulted or may result in an assessment of fines or penalties by governmental
regulatory agencies, self-regulatory organizations or other enforcement authorities.

Restructuring provisions arise out of restructuring activities. The Group aims to enhance its long-term competitiveness through
major reductions in costs, duplication and complexity in the years ahead. For details see Note 10 “Restructuring”.

Other provisions include several specific items arising from a variety of different circumstances, including the provision for the
reimbursement of loan processing fees, deferred sales commissions, provisions for bank levies and mortgage repurchase
demands.


Provisions and Contingent Liabilities
The Group recognizes a provision for potential loss only when there is a present obligation arising from a past event that is
probable to result in an economic outflow that can be reliably estimated. Where a reliable estimate cannot be made for such
an obligation, no provision is recognized and the obligation is deemed a contingent liability. Contingent liabilities also include
possible obligations for which the possibility of future economic outflow is more than remote but less than probable. Where a
provision has been taken for a particular claim, no contingent liability is recorded; for matters or sets of matters consisting of
more than one claim, however, provisions may be recorded for some claims, and contingent liabilities (or neither a provision
nor a contingent liability) may be recorded for others.




                                                                                                                                                                          276
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                27 – Provisions




The Group operates in a legal and regulatory environment that exposes it to significant litigation risks. As a result, the Group
is involved in litigation, arbitration and regulatory proceedings and investigations in Germany and in a number of jurisdicti ons
outside Germany, including the United States. In recent years, regulation and supervision in a number of areas have increased,
and regulators, governmental bodies and others have sought to subject financial services providers to increasing oversight
and scrutiny, which in turn has led to additional regulatory investigations and enforcement actions which are often followed by
civil litigation.

In determining for which of the claims the possibility of a loss is probable, or less than probable but more than remote, and
then estimating the possible loss for those claims, the Group takes into consideration a number of factors, including but not
limited to the nature of the claim and its underlying facts, the procedural posture and litigation history of each case, rulings by
the courts or tribunals, the Group’s experience and the experience of others in similar cases (to the extent this is known to the
Group), prior settlement discussions, settlements by others in similar cases (to the extent this is known to the Group), available
indemnities and the opinions and views of legal counsel and other experts.

The provisions the Group has recognized for civil litigation and regulatory enforcement matters as of December 31, 2021 and
December 31, 2020 are set forth in the table above. For some matters for which the Group believes an outflow of funds is
probable, no provisions were recognized as the Group could not reliably estimate the amount of the potential outflow.

For the matters for which a reliable estimate can be made, the Group currently estimates that, as of December 31, 2021, the
aggregate future loss of which the possibility is more than remote but less than probable is approximately € 1.7 billion for civil
litigation matters (December 31, 2020: € 2.1 billion) and € 0.1 billion for regulatory enforcement matters (December 31, 2020:
€ 0.2 billion). These figures include matters where the Group’s potential liability is joint and several and where the Group
expects any such liability to be paid by a third party. For other significant civil litigation and regulatory enforcement mat ters,
the Group believes the possibility of an outflow of funds is more than remote but less than probable but the amount is not
reliably estimable, and accordingly such matters are not included in the contingent liability estimates. For still other significant
civil litigation and regulatory enforcement matters, the Group believes the possibility of an outflow of funds is remote and
therefore has neither recognized a provision nor included them in the contingent liability estimates.

This estimated possible loss, as well as any provisions taken, is based upon currently available information and is subject to
significant judgment and a variety of assumptions, variables and known and unknown uncertainties. These uncertainties may
include inaccuracies in or incompleteness of the information available to the Group, particularly at the preliminary stages of
matters, and assumptions by the Group as to future rulings of courts or other tribunals or the likely actions or positions taken
by regulators or adversaries may prove incorrect. Moreover, estimates of possible loss for these matters are often not
amenable to the use of statistical or other quantitative analytical tools frequently used in making judgments and estimates,
and are subject to even greater degrees of uncertainty than in many other areas where the Group must exercise judgment
and make estimates. The estimated possible loss, as well as any provisions taken, can be and often are substantially less
than the amount initially requested by regulators or adversaries or the maximum potential loss that could be incurred were the
matters to result in a final adjudication adverse to the Group. Moreover, in several regions in which the Group operates, an
adversary often is not required to set forth the amount it is seeking, and where it is, the amount may not be subject to the
same requirements that generally apply to pleading factual allegations or legal claims.

The matters for which the Group determines that the possibility of a future loss is more than remote will change from time to
time, as will the matters as to which a reliable estimate can be made and the estimated possible loss for such matters. Actual
results may prove to be significantly higher or lower than the estimate of possible loss in those matters where such an estimate
was made. In addition, loss may be incurred in matters with respect to which the Group believed the likelihood of loss was
remote. In particular, the estimated aggregate possible loss does not represent the Group’s potential maximum loss exposure
for those matters.

The Group may settle litigation or regulatory proceedings or investigations prior to a final judgment or determination of liability.
It may do so to avoid the cost, management efforts or negative business, regulatory or reputational consequences of continuing
to contest liability, even when the Group believes it has valid defenses to liability. It may also do so when the potential
consequences of failing to prevail would be disproportionate to the costs of settlement. Furthermore, the Group may, for similar
reasons, reimburse counterparties for their losses even in situations where it does not believe that it is legally compelled to do
so.




                                                                                                                              277
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                27 – Provisions




Current Individual Proceedings
Set forth below are descriptions of civil litigation and regulatory enforcement matters or groups of matters for which the Group
has taken material provisions, or for which there are material contingent liabilities that are more than remote, or for which there
is the possibility of material business or reputational risk; similar matters are grouped together and some matters consist of a
number of proceedings or claims. The disclosed matters include matters for which the possibility of a loss is more than remote
but for which the Group cannot reliably estimate the possible loss. Sets of matters are presented in English-language
alphabetical order based on the titles the Group has used for them.

Anti-Money Laundering Matters Involving Former Correspondent Banking Relationships. Deutsche Bank has received
requests for information from government authorities concerning certain former correspondent banking relationships, including
Danske Bank. Deutsche Bank is providing information to and otherwise cooperating with the investigating authorities. The
Bank also completed an internal investigation focused on the Bank’s historical processing of correspondent banking
transactions on behalf of customers of Danske Bank’s Estonia branch prior to cessation of the correspondent banking
relationship with that branch in 2015, including of whether any violations of law, regulation or Bank policy occurred and the
effectiveness of the related internal control environment.

Additionally, on September 24 and 25, 2019, based on a search warrant issued by the Local Court (Amtsgericht) in Frankfurt,
the Frankfurt Public Prosecutor’s (FPP’s) office conducted investigations into Deutsche Bank in connection with suspicious
activity reports relating to potential money laundering at Danske Bank. On October 13, 2020, the FPP closed its criminal
investigation because the FPP did not find sufficient evidence to substantiate the money laundering suspicion. However, the
Bank agreed to pay an administrative fine of € 13.5 million to the FPP for failing to submit suspicious activity reports (SARs)
in Germany in a timely fashion, which Deutsche Bank paid in the fourth quarter of 2020.

On July 7, 2020, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a Consent Order, finding that Deutsche
Bank violated New York State banking laws in connection with its relationships with three former Deutsche Bank clients--
Danske Bank’s Estonia branch, Jeffrey Epstein and FBME Bank--and imposing a U.S.$ 150 million civil penalty in connection
with these three former relationships, which Deutsche Bank paid in the third quarter of 2020.

The remaining investigations are understood to be ongoing.

On July 15, 2020, Deutsche Bank was named as a defendant in a securities class action filed in the U.S. District Court for the
District of New Jersey, alleging that the Bank made material misrepresentations regarding the effectiveness of its anti-money
laundering (AML) controls and related remediation. The complaint cites allegations regarding control deficiencies raised in the
DFS Consent Order related to the Bank’s relationships with Danske Bank’s Estonia branch, Jeffrey Epstein and FBME Bank.
On September 30, 2020, the plaintiff filed an amended complaint that included additional allegations regarding the
effectiveness of the Bank’s AML controls. On December 28, 2020, the court appointed lead plaintiff and lead counsel. Lead
plaintiff filed a second amended complaint on March 1, 2021. On April 23, 2021, the Bank filed a motion to transfer the action,
or in the alternative, to dismiss the second amended complaint. Briefing on the motion concluded on July 1, 2021.

The Group has not established a provision or contingent liability with respect to the remaining investigations and civil action.

BGH. On April 27, 2021 the German Federal Court of Justice (BGH) issued a ruling that certain clauses used in the Bank’s
General Terms and Conditions, which assume the customer consents following a notice and non-objection period, are void in
relation to consumers (Verbraucher). The group received the written reasoning for this judgment on May 27, 2021. The relevant
clauses were widely used in the German banking industry. The BGH overturned the prior decisions of both the Regional Court
and Higher Regional Court of Cologne, which had dismissed the claim brought forward by a consumer protection association.
As a result of this ruling, fees introduced or increased since 2018 on the basis of this modification mechanism are potentially
ineffective and consumers (Verbraucher) can claim repayment of respective banking fees. The group has established a civil
litigation class provision of €130 million in the second quarter of 2021 with respect to this matter.

Cum-ex Investigations and Litigations. Deutsche Bank has received inquiries from law enforcement authorities, including
requests for information and documents, in relation to cum-ex transactions of clients. “Cum-ex” refers to trading activities in
German shares around dividend record dates (trade date before and settlement date after dividend record date) for the
purpose of obtaining German tax credits or refunds in relation to withholding tax levied on dividend payments including, in
particular, transaction structures that have resulted in more than one market participant claiming such credit or refund with
respect to the same dividend payment. Deutsche Bank is cooperating with the law enforcement authorities in these matters.

The Public Prosecutor in Cologne (Staatsanwaltschaft Köln, “CPP”) has been conducting a criminal investigation since
August 2017 concerning two former employees of Deutsche Bank in relation to cum-ex transactions of certain former clients
of the Bank. Deutsche Bank is a potential secondary participant pursuant to Section 30 of the German Law on Administrative
Offences in this proceeding. This proceeding could result in a disgorgement of profits and fines. Deutsche Bank is cooperating
with the CPP. At the end of May and beginning of June 2019, the CPP initiated criminal investigations against further current


                                                                                                                             278
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                 27 – Provisions




and former employees of Deutsche Bank and five former Management Board members. In July 2020, in the course of
inspecting the CPP’s investigation file, Deutsche Bank learned that the CPP had further extended its investigation in June
2019 to include further current and former DB personnel, including one former Management Board member and one current
Management Board member. Very limited information on the individuals was recorded in the file. The investigation is still at
an early stage and the scope of the investigation may be further broadened.

In May 2021, Deutsche Bank learned through an information request received by Deutsche Oppenheim Family Office AG
(“DOAG”) as legal successor of Sal. Oppenheim jr. & Cie. AG & Co. KGaA (“Sal. Oppenheim”) that the CPP in 2021 opened
a criminal investigation proceeding in relation to cum-ex transactions against unknown former personnel of Sal. Oppenheim.
DOAG provided the requested information on September 13 and October 15, 2021.

Deutsche Bank acted as participant in and filed withholding tax refund claims through the electronic refund procedure
(elektronisches Datenträgerverfahren) on behalf of, inter alia, two former custody clients in connection with their cum-ex
transactions. In February 2018, Deutsche Bank received from the German Federal Tax Office (Bundeszentralamt für Steuern,
“FTO”) a demand of approximately € 49 million for tax refunds paid to a former custody client. Deutsche Bank expects to
receive a formal notice for the same amount. On December 20, 2019, Deutsche Bank received a liability notice from the FTO
requesting payment of € 2.1 million by January 20, 2020 in connection with tax refund claims Deutsche Bank had submitted
on behalf of another former custody client. In 2020, Deutsche Bank made the requested payment and filed an objection against
the liability notice. On December 3, 2020, Deutsche Bank received another hearing letter from the FTO in relation to the
€ 2.1 million liability notice to which Deutsche Bank responded on April 16, 2021. On July 28, 2021, Deutsche Bank received
a letter from the FTO stating that the revised tax assessment notice dated December 2019 was not a valid administrative act
as it could not be served to Deutsche Bank’s client due to its liquidation already in 2016. On the same day, FTO issued another
liability notice to Deutsche Bank arguing that it issued incorrect tax certificates. The € 2.1 million payment made by Deutsche
Bank under the first liability notice was offset by FTO in the second liability notice. Thus, no further payments were made by
Deutsche Bank. Deutsche Bank objected to the second liability notice on August 31, 2021 and filed the reasoning on October
14, 2021. On November 9, 2021, it submitted a further brief in this matter.

By letter dated February 26, 2018, The Bank of New York Mellon SA/NV (“BNY”) informed Deutsche Bank of its intention to
seek indemnification for potential cum-ex related tax liabilities incurred by BHF Asset Servicing GmbH (“BAS”) and/or
Frankfurter Service Kapitalanlage-GmbH (“Service KAG”, now named BNY Mellon Service Kapitalanlage-Gesellschaft mbH).
Deutsche Bank had acquired BAS and Service KAG as part of the acquisition of Sal. Oppenheim in 2010 and sold them to
BNY in the same year. BNY estimates the potential tax liability to amount to up to € 120 million. In November and December
2020 counsel to BNY informed Deutsche Bank that BNY and / or Service KAG (among others) have received notices from tax
authorities in the estimated amount with respect to cum-ex related trades by certain investment funds in 2009 and 2010. BNY
has filed objections against the notices.

On February 6, 2019, the Regional Court (Landgericht) Frankfurt am Main served Deutsche Bank with a claim by M.M.Warburg
& CO Gruppe GmbH and M.M.Warburg & CO (AG & Co.) KGaA (together “Warburg”) in connection with cum-ex transactions
of Warburg with a custody client of Deutsche Bank during 2007 to 2011. Warburg claimed from Deutsche Bank indemnification
against German taxes in relation to transactions conducted in the years 2007 to 2011. Further, Warburg claimed compensation
of unspecified damages relating to these transactions. Based on the tax assessment notices received for 2007 to 2011,
Warburg claimed a total of € 250 million (of which € 166 million is in relation to taxes and € 84 million is in relation to interest).
On March 20, 2020, Warburg extended its claim against Deutsche Bank to indemnify Warburg in relation to the € 176 million
(thereof € 166 million in relation to taxes and € 10 million in relation to interest) criminal confiscation order issued by the
Regional Court Bonn in the criminal cum-ex trial on March 18, 2020 regarding the same transactions. On July 28, 2021 the
German Federal Court of Justice (BGH) confirmed the criminal confiscation. On September 23, 2020, the Frankfurt Regional
Court fully dismissed Warburg’s claim against Deutsche Bank on the grounds that Warburg as the tax debtor (Steuerschuldner)
is primarily liable and cannot request payment from Deutsche Bank. The court further held that any claims are time-barred.
On October 29, 2020, Warburg appealed the decision with the Higher Regional Court (Oberlandesgericht) Frankfurt am Main.
Following appellate briefs by Warburg and Deutsche Bank the hearing of the appeal proceeding took place on November 3,
2021. On December 1, 2021, Warburg reduced its claim from the first instance proceeding. Warburg now claims € 86 million
(thereof € 63 million in relation to taxes and € 23 million in relation to interest). Further, Warburg claims an amount of € 54
million in relation to the criminal confiscation. A further hearing took place on January 26, 2022. In a judgment dated March 2,
2022, the Higher Regional Court (Oberlandesgericht) Frankfurt am Main fully dismissed Warburg’s appeal. The court did not
admit an appeal of its decision to the German Federal Court of Justice (BGH). Warburg may file an appeal against this non-
admission (Nichtzulassungsbeschwerde).

On January 25, 2021, the Regional Court (Landgericht) Hamburg served Deutsche Bank with a claim by Warburg Invest
Kapitalanlagegesellschaft mbH (“Warburg Invest”) in relation to transactions of two investment funds in 2009 and 2010,
respectively. Warburg Invest was fund manager for both funds. Warburg Invest claims, from Deutsche Bank together with
several other parties as joint and several debtors (Gesamtschuldner), indemnification against German taxes in relation to cum-
ex transactions conducted by the two funds. Further, Warburg Invest claims compensation of unspecified damages relating
to these transactions. In November 2020, Warburg Invest received a tax liability notice from tax authorities for one of the funds



                                                                                                                               279
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                               27 – Provisions




in the amount of € 61 million. Based on publicly available information Deutsche Bank estimates the tax amount for the second
fund to be approximately € 49 million. Warburg Invest filed its claim against several parties including Deutsche Bank inter alia
based on an allegation of intentional damage contrary to public policy (Section 826 German Civil Code) and the accusation
that Deutsche Bank participated in a business model that was contrary to public policy (sittenwidriges Geschäftsmodell). On
July 5, 2021, Deutsche Bank submitted its defense statement to the court. On December 31, 2021, two other defendants of
the proceeding served a notice of dispute (Streitverkündung) to several parties including Deutsche Bank.

On February 26, 2021, the Regional Court (Landgericht) Frankfurt am Main served Deutsche Bank with a claim by Seriva
Vermögensverwaltungs GmbH (“Seriva”). Seriva is requesting that Deutsche Bank reissue certain tax certificates
(Steuerbescheinigungen) that Deutsche Bank withdrew in April 2017 in light of Seriva’s cum-ex transactions. Deutsche Bank
responded to Seriva’s statement of claim on April 6, 2021. On July 5, 2021, Deutsche Bank received a reply brief from Seriva.
Deutsche Bank responded on August 17, 2021. The hearing took place on February 7, 2022. In a judgment dated February
28, 2022, the court dismissed Seriva’s claim. Seriva may appeal the decision.

The Group has not disclosed whether it has established a provision or contingent liability with respect to these matters because
it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to prejudice seriously their outcome.

FX Investigations and Litigations. Deutsche Bank has received requests for information from certain regulatory and law
enforcement agencies globally who investigated trading in, and various other aspects of, the foreign exchange market.
Deutsche Bank cooperated with these investigations. Relatedly, Deutsche Bank has conducted its own internal global review
of foreign exchange trading and other aspects of its foreign exchange business.

On October 19, 2016, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), Division of Enforcement, issued a letter
(“CFTC Letter”) notifying Deutsche Bank that the CFTC Division of Enforcement “is not taking any further action at this time
and has closed the investigation of Deutsche Bank” regarding foreign exchange. As is customary, the CFTC Letter states that
the CFTC Division of Enforcement “maintains the discretion to decide to reopen the investigation at any time in the future.”
The CFTC Letter has no binding impact on other regulatory and law enforcement agency investigations regarding Deutsche
Bank’s foreign exchange trading and practices.

On December 7, 2016, it was announced that Deutsche Bank reached an agreement with CADE, the Brazilian antitrust
enforcement agency, to settle an investigation into conduct by a former Brazil-based Deutsche Bank trader. As part of that
settlement, Deutsche Bank paid a fine of BRL 51 million and agreed to continue to comply with the CADE’s administrative
process until it is concluded. This resolves CADE’s administrative process as it relates to Deutsche Bank, subject to Deutsche
Bank’s continued compliance with the settlement terms.

On February 13, 2017, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), Criminal Division, Fraud Section, issued a letter (“DOJ Letter”)
notifying Deutsche Bank that the DOJ has closed its criminal inquiry “concerning possible violations of federal criminal law in
connection with the foreign exchange markets.” As is customary, the DOJ Letter states that the DOJ may reopen its inquiry if
it obtains additional information or evidence regarding the inquiry. The DOJ Letter has no binding impact on other regulatory
and law enforcement agency investigations regarding Deutsche Bank’s foreign exchange trading and practices.

On April 20, 2017, it was announced that Deutsche Bank AG, DB USA Corporation and Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch
reached an agreement with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to settle an investigation into Deutsche
Bank’s foreign exchange trading and practices. Under the terms of the settlement, Deutsche Bank entered into a cease-and-
desist order, and agreed to pay a civil monetary penalty of U.S.$ 137 million. In addition, the Federal Reserve ordered
Deutsche Bank to “continue to implement additional improvements in its oversight, internal controls, compliance, risk
management and audit programs” for its foreign exchange business and other similar products, and to periodically report to
the Federal Reserve on its progress.

On June 20, 2018, it was announced that Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch reached an agreement
with the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) to settle an investigation into Deutsche Bank’s foreign
exchange trading and sales practices. Under the terms of the settlement, Deutsche Bank entered into a consent order, and
agreed to pay a civil monetary penalty of U.S.$ 205 million. In addition, the DFS ordered Deutsche Bank to continue to
implement improvements in its oversight, internal controls, compliance, risk management and audit programs for its foreign
exchange business, and to periodically report to the DFS on its progress.

Investigations conducted by certain other regulatory agencies are ongoing, and Deutsche Bank has cooperated with these
investigations.

On February 25, 2020, plaintiffs in the “Indirect Purchasers” action pending in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District
of New York (Contant, et al. v. Bank of America Corp., et al.) informed the court of a global settlement with all eleven
defendants remaining in that action, including Deutsche Bank, collectively for U.S.$ 10 million. Each individual defendant’s
contribution, including Deutsche Bank’s, remains confidential. The court approved the settlement and dismissed with prejudice



                                                                                                                           280
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                27 – Provisions




all claims alleged against Deutsche Bank in that action on November 19, 2020. Filed on November 7, 2018, Allianz, et al. v.
Bank of America Corporation, et al., was brought on an individual basis by a group of asset managers who opted out of the
settlement in a consolidated action (In re Foreign Exchange Benchmark Rates Antitrust Litigation). Defendants’ motion to
dismiss was granted and denied in part on May 28, 2020. Plaintiffs filed a third amended complaint on July 28, 2020. Discovery
is ongoing.

Deutsche Bank also has been named as a defendant in two Canadian class proceedings brought in the provinces of Ontario
and Quebec. Filed on September 10, 2015, these class actions assert factual allegations similar to those made in the
consolidated action in the United States and seek damages pursuant to the Canadian Competition Act as well as other causes
of action. Plaintiffs’ motion for class certification in the Ontario action was granted on April 14, 2020. On July 2, 2021, Deutsche
Bank entered an agreement to settle the Canadian class proceedings. The settlement agreement was approved by the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice on September 23, 2021, and the Quebec Superior Court of Justice on October 20, 2021.

Deutsche Bank has also been named as a defendant in an amended and consolidated class action filed in Israel. This action
asserts factual allegations similar to those made in the consolidated action in the United States and seeks damages pursuant
to Israeli antitrust law as well as other causes of action. This action is in preliminary stages.

On November 10, 2020, Deutsche Bank was named in an action issued in the UK High Court of Justice (Commercial Court)
brought by The ECU Group PLC. The proceedings have now settled on confidential terms.

On November 11, 2020, Deutsche Bank was named in an action issued in the UK High Court of Justice (Commercial Court)
brought by many of the same plaintiffs who brought Allianz, et al. v. Bank of America Corporation, et al. referred to above. The
claim is based upon factual allegations similar to those made in Allianz, et al. v. Bank of America Corporation, et al. The
proceedings are at the pleadings stage.

On May 4, 2021, Deutsche Bank S.A. – Banco Alemao was named in a civil antitrust action brought in the São Paulo Civil
Court of Central Jurisdiction by the Association of Brazilian Exporters (AEB) against certain FX dealers and affiliated financial
institutions in Brazil. This action asserts factual allegations based on conduct investigated by CADE and seeks damages
pursuant to Brazilian antitrust law. Deutsche Bank has not yet been served.

The Group has not disclosed whether it has established a provision or contingent liability with respect to these matters because
it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to seriously prejudice its outcome.

Interbank and Dealer Offered Rates Matters. Regulatory and Law Enforcement Matters. Deutsche Bank has responded to
requests for information from, and cooperated with, various regulatory and law enforcement agencies, in connection with
industry-wide investigations concerning the setting of the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), Euro Interbank Offered
Rate (EURIBOR), Tokyo Interbank Offered Rate (TIBOR) and other interbank and/or dealer offered rates.

As previously reported, Deutsche Bank paid € 725 million to the European Commission pursuant to a settlement agreement
dated December 4, 2013 in relation to anticompetitive conduct in the trading of interest rate derivatives.

Also as previously reported, on April 23, 2015, Deutsche Bank entered into separate settlements with the DOJ, the CFTC, the
UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), and the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) to resolve
investigations into misconduct concerning the setting of LIBOR, EURIBOR, and TIBOR. Under the terms of these agreements,
Deutsche Bank paid penalties of U.S.$ 2.175 billion to the DOJ, CFTC and DFS and GBP 226.8 million to the FCA. As part of
the resolution with the DOJ, DB Group Services (UK) Limited (an indirectly-held, wholly-owned subsidiary of Deutsche Bank)
pled guilty to one count of wire fraud in the U.S. District Court for the District of Connecticut and Deutsche Bank entered into
a Deferred Prosecution Agreement with a three year term pursuant to which it agreed (among other things) to the filing of an
Information in the U.S. District Court for the District of Connecticut charging Deutsche Bank with one count of wire fraud and
one count of price fixing in violation of the Sherman Act. On April 23, 2018, the Deferred Prosecution Agreement expired, and
the U.S. District Court for the District of Connecticut subsequently dismissed the criminal Information against Deutsche Bank.

Also, as previously reported, on March 20, 2017, Deutsche Bank paid CHF 5.4 million to the Swiss Competition Commission
(WEKO) pursuant to a settlement agreement in relation to Yen LIBOR.

On October 25, 2017, Deutsche Bank entered into a settlement with a working group of U.S. state attorneys general resolving
their interbank offered rate investigation. Among other conditions, Deutsche Bank made a settlement payment of
U.S.$ 220 million.

Other investigations of Deutsche Bank concerning the setting of various interbank and/or dealer offered rates remain ongoing.

The Group has not disclosed whether it has established a provision or contingent liability with respect to the remaining
investigations because it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to seriously prejudice its outcome.



                                                                                                                              281
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                27 – Provisions




Overview of Civil Litigations. Deutsche Bank is party to 27 U.S. civil actions concerning alleged manipulation relating to the
setting of various interbank and/or dealer offered rates which are described in the following paragraphs, as well as actions
pending in each of the UK, Israel, Argentina and Spain. Most of the civil actions, including putative class actions, are pending
in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York (SDNY), against Deutsche Bank and numerous other
defendants. All but three of the U.S. civil actions were filed on behalf of parties who allege losses as a result of manipula tion
relating to the setting of U.S. dollar LIBOR. The three U.S. civil actions pending against Deutsche Bank that do not relate to
U.S. dollar LIBOR were also filed in the SDNY, and include one consolidated action concerning Pound Sterling (GBP) LIBOR,
one action concerning Swiss franc (CHF) LIBOR, and one action concerning two Singapore Dollar (SGD) benchmark rates,
the Singapore Interbank Offered Rate (SIBOR) and the Swap Offer Rate (SOR).

Claims for damages for all 27 of the U.S. civil actions discussed have been asserted under various legal theories, including
violations of the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act, federal and state antitrust laws, the U.S. Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act, and other federal and state laws. The Group has not disclosed whether it has established a provision or
contingent liability with respect to these matters because it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to prejudice
seriously their outcome.

U.S. dollar LIBOR. With two exceptions, all of the U.S. civil actions concerning U.S. dollar LIBOR are being coordinated as
part of a multidistrict litigation (the “U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL”) in the SDNY. In light of the large number of individual cases
pending against Deutsche Bank and their similarity, the civil actions included in the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL are now subsumed
under the following general description of the litigation pertaining to all such actions, without disclosure of individual act ions
except when the circumstances or the resolution of an individual case is material to Deutsche Bank.

Following a series of decisions in the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL between March 2013 and March 2019 narrowing their claims,
plaintiffs are currently asserting antitrust claims, claims under the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act and U.S. Securities
Exchange Act and state law fraud, contract, unjust enrichment and other tort claims. The court has also issued decisions
dismissing certain plaintiffs’ claims for lack of personal jurisdiction and on statute of limitations grounds.

On December 20, 2016, the district court issued a ruling dismissing certain antitrust claims while allowing others to proceed.
Multiple plaintiffs have filed appeals of the district court’s December 20, 2016 ruling to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, and those appeals proceeded in parallel with the ongoing proceedings in the district court. On December 30, 2021,
the Second Circuit affirmed the district court’s decision on antitrust standing grounds but reversed the court’s decision on
personal jurisdiction grounds, and it remanded the cases to the district court for further proceedings.

On July 29, 2020, Deutsche Bank executed a settlement agreement with plaintiffs in the amount of U.S.$ 425,000 to resolve
a putative class action pending as part of the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL asserting claims on behalf of lending institutions
headquartered in the United States that originated, purchased outright, or purchased a participation interest in loans tied to
U.S. dollar LIBOR (The Berkshire Bank v. Bank of America). The court granted the settlement final approval on March 15,
2021, and dismissed all claims against Deutsche Bank. Accordingly, the action is not included in the total number of actions
above. The settlement amount, which Deutsche Bank has paid, is no longer reflected in Deutsche Bank’s litigation provisions.

On March 5, 2021, Deutsche Bank and the plaintiffs in a non-class action pending as part of the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL
(Amabile v. Bank of America Corporation) stipulated to the dismissal of the plaintiffs’ claims against Deutsche Bank. The court
dismissed the plaintiffs’ claims on March 8, 2021.

On December 8, 2021, Deutsche Bank and the plaintiffs in four non-class actions pending as part of the U.S. dollar LIBOR
MDL (the Schwab actions) stipulated to the dismissal of plaintiffs’ claims against Deutsche Bank, The court dismissed plaintiffs’
claims on December 10, 2021. On February 3, 2022, Deutsche Bank and the plaintiffs in two non-class actions pending as
part of the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL (the Philadelphia actions) stipulated to the dismissal of plaintiffs’ claims against Deutsche
Bank. The court dismissed plaintiffs’ claims on February 4, 2022.

In January and March 2019, plaintiffs filed three putative class action complaints in the SDNY against several financial
institutions, alleging that the defendants, members of the panel of banks that provided U.S. dollar LIBOR submissions, the
organization that administers LIBOR, and their affiliates, conspired to suppress U.S. dollar LIBOR submissions from
February 1, 2014 through the present. These actions were subsequently consolidated under In re ICE LIBOR Antitrust
Litigation, and on July 1, 2019, the plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint. On March 26, 2020, the court granted
the defendants’ motion to dismiss the action, dismissing all claims against Deutsche Bank. Plaintiffs have appealed that
decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Briefing of the appeal is complete. On December 28, 2020, DYJ
Holdings, LLC filed a motion to intervene in the appeal as named plaintiff and proposed class representative, as one of the
original named plaintiffs has withdrawn and dismissed its claims and the other two named plaintiffs have expressed a desire
to withdraw from the case. On January 7, 2021, defendants filed a motion to dismiss the appeal for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction. On April 6, 2021, the court granted the motion to intervene and denied defendants’ motion to dismiss. Oral
argument was heard on November 29, 2021. This action is not part of the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL.




                                                                                                                             282
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                 27 – Provisions




In August 2020, plaintiffs filed a non-class action in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California against several
financial institutions, alleging that U.S. dollar LIBOR has been suppressed through the present. On November 10, 2020,
plaintiffs moved the court for a preliminary and permanent injunction; briefing of that motion is complete. On November 11,
2020, certain defendants moved to transfer the action to the SDNY; briefing of that motion is complete. On May 24, 2021,
plaintiffs filed a motion for an order to show cause why the court should not order plaintiffs’ previously requested injuncti on.
Defendants moved to strike the motion. On June 3, 2021, the court issued an order (i) denying defendants’ motion to transfer
the action to the SDNY, (ii) denying defendants’ motion to strike plaintiffs’ May 24 motion and (iii) setting a hearing for the
injunction motions for September 9, 2021. On December 23, 2021, the court issued a written decision denying the injunction
motions. On September 9, 2021, the court held a hearing on the injunction motions and tentatively denied the motions. On
September 30, 2021, defendants moved to dismiss the complaint. The motions to dismiss are now fully briefed. This action is
not part of the U.S. dollar LIBOR MDL.

There is a further UK civil action regarding U.S. dollar LIBOR brought by the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC), in which a claim for damages has been asserted pursuant to Article 101 of The Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union, Section 2 of Chapter 1 of the UK Competition Act 1998 and U.S. state laws. In January 2022, following a
ruling issued by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in relation to USD LIBOR antitrust claims, the FDIC has
requested the defendant banks consider a short stay of the UK LIBOR proceedings, pending resolution of an application to
reinstate these either in part or full in the US.

A further class action regarding LIBOR has been filed in Argentina seeking damages for losses allegedly suffered by holders
of Argentine bonds with interest rates based on LIBOR. Deutsche Bank is defending this action.

SIBOR and SOR. A putative class action alleging manipulation of the Singapore Interbank Offered Rate (SIBOR) and Swap
Offer Rate (SOR) remains pending. On July 26, 2019, the SDNY granted defendants’ motion to dismiss the action, dismissing
all claims against Deutsche Bank, and denied plaintiff’s motion for leave to file a fourth amended complaint. Plaintiff appealed
that decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. On March 17, 2021, the court reversed the SDNY’s decision
and remanded the case to the district court. On October 1, 2021, defendants (including Deutsche Bank)) filed a petition for a
writ of certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court to review the Court of Appeals’ March 17, 2021 decision. The petition was denied
on January 10, 2022. On October 25, 2021, plaintiffs filed their fourth amended complaint, which defendants moved to dismiss
on November 24, 2021.

GBP LIBOR. A putative class action alleging manipulation of the Pound Sterling (GBP) LIBOR remains pending. On
December 21, 2018, the SDNY partially granted defendants’ motions to dismiss the action, dismissing all claims against
Deutsche Bank. Plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal; the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ordered that the appeal be
held in abeyance pending that court’s decision in the appeal of the SIBOR and SOR class action. Following that court’s
decision in the SIBOR and SOR class action on March 17, 2021, the appeal is moving forward. Plaintiffs filed their opening
brief on October 21, 2021, and all defendants-appellees’ except Deutsche Bank filed their briefs on January 20, 2022. Also
on January 20, 2022, plaintiffs filed a motion for (1) severance of their appeal with respect to Deutsche Bank, (2) stay of the
severed appeal as to Deutsche Bank, and (3) limited remand of that portion of the matter concerning Deutsche Bank to the
district court to consider the approval of a proposed settlement between plaintiffs and Deutsche Bank. The Second Circuit
granted plaintiffs’ motion on January 26, 2022.

CHF LIBOR. A putative class action alleging manipulation of the Swiss Franc (CHF) LIBOR remains pending. On
September 16, 2019, the SDNY granted defendants’ motion to dismiss the action, dismissing all claims against Deutsche
Bank. Plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal; the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ordered that the appeal be held in
abeyance pending that court’s decision in the appeal of the SIBOR and SOR class action. Following that court’s decision in
the SIBOR and SOR class action on March 17, 2021, the CHF LIBOR action was remanded to the district court for further
proceedings.

Spanish EURIBOR Claims. 68 claims in Spain have been filed against Deutsche Bank by claimants with mortgage loans held
by banks and other financial institutions for damages resulting from alleged collusive behavior by Deutsche Bank following the
European Commission’s Decision. Of the 68 claims, court proceedings with respect to 49 claims have commenced. The total
value of the 68 claims is approximately € 1 million with the potential for more claims. Of those already commenced, 21
judgments have been handed down. In 10 of these judgements the claims were dismissed. In the remaining 11, the
judgements upheld the application of the EU Damages Directive, albeit that in 6 of these no damages were awarded, with the
remaining 5 resulting in damages being reduced to only 10 %. The Bank is appealing all decisions where this EU Damages
directive was applied.




                                                                                                                               283
Deutsche Bank                                    Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                               27 – Provisions




Investigations Into Referral Hiring Practices and Certain Business Relationships and Preciou s Metals. On August 22, 2019,
Deutsche Bank reached a settlement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to resolve its investigation
into the Bank’s hiring practices related to candidates referred by clients, potential clients and government officials. The Bank
agreed to pay U.S.$ 16 million as part of the settlement. The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) closed its investigation of the
Bank regarding its hiring practices. Deutsche Bank has also reached settlements with the DOJ and the SEC, respectively,
regarding their investigations of the Bank’s compliance with the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) and other laws
with respect to the Bank’s engagement of finders and consultants. On January 8, 2021, Deutsche Bank entered into a deferred
prosecution agreement (DPA) with the DOJ concerning its historical engagements of finders and consultants and, as part of
its obligations in the DPA, agreed to pay approximately U.S.$ 80 million in connection with this conduct. The DPA with the
DOJ also involved a resolution involving spoofing in precious metals. As part of its obligations in the DPA relating to precious
metals, Deutsche Bank agreed to pay approximately U.S.$ 8 million, of which approximately U.S.$ 6 million would be credited
by virtue of Deutsche Bank’s 2018 resolution with the CFTC. On the same day, Deutsche Bank also reached a settlement
with the SEC to resolve its investigation into conduct regarding the Bank’s compliance with the FCPA with respect to the
Bank’s engagement of finders and consultants. The Bank agreed to pay approximately U.S.$ 43 million in this SEC settlement.
On February 28, 2022, following a finding by the DOJ that the Bank violated the 2021 DPA based on untimely reporting by the
Bank of certain allegations relating to environmental, social and governance (ESG)-related information at the Bank’s subsidiary
DWS Group GmbH & Co. KGaA, the Bank agreed with the DOJ to extend an existing monitorship and abide by the terms of
a prior deferred prosecution agreement until February 2023 to allow the monitor to certify to the Bank’s implementation of the
related internal controls. The DOJ has reserved all rights to take further action regarding the 2021 DPA if it deems necessary.

Jeffrey Epstein Investigations. Deutsche Bank has received requests for information from regulatory and law enforcement
agencies concerning the Bank’s former client relationship with Jeffrey Epstein (individually, and through related parties and
entities). In December 2018, Deutsche Bank began the process to terminate its relationship with Epstein, which began in
August 2013. Deutsche Bank has provided information to and otherwise cooperated with the investigating agencies. The Bank
has also completed an internal investigation into the Epstein relationship.

On July 7, 2020, the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) issued a Consent Order, finding that Deutsche
Bank violated New York State banking laws in connection with its relationships with three former Deutsche Bank clients,
Danske Bank’s Estonia branch, Jeffrey Epstein and FBME Bank, and imposing a U.S.$ 150 million civil penalty in connection
with these three former relationships, which Deutsche Bank paid in the third quarter of 2020. As noted above, the Bank is also
named as a defendant in a securities class action pending in the U.S. District Court for the District of New Jersey that includes
allegations relating to the Bank’s relationship with Jeffrey Epstein and other entities.

The Group has not established a provision or contingent liability with respect to the Jeffrey Epstein investigations and civil
action. The remaining investigations relating to Jeffrey Epstein are understood to be ongoing.

Mortgage-Related and Asset-Backed Securities Matters and Investigation. Regulatory and Governmental Matters.
Deutsche Bank, along with certain affiliates (collectively referred in these paragraphs to as “Deutsche Bank”), received
subpoenas and requests for information from certain regulators and government entities, including members of the Residential
Mortgage-Backed Securities Working Group of the U.S. Financial Fraud Enforcement Task Force, concerning its activities
regarding the origination, purchase, securitization, sale, valuation and/or trading of mortgage loans, reside ntial mortgage-
backed securities (RMBS), commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), other
asset-backed securities and credit derivatives. Deutsche Bank fully cooperated in response to those subpoenas and requests
for information.

On December 23, 2016, Deutsche Bank announced that it reached a settlement-in-principle with the DOJ to resolve potential
claims related to its RMBS business conducted from 2005 to 2007. The settlement became final and was announced by the
DOJ on January 17, 2017. Under the settlement, Deutsche Bank paid a civil monetary penalty of U.S.$ 3.1 billion and provided
U.S.$ 4.1 billion in consumer relief. The DOJ appointed an independent monitor to oversee and validate the provision of
consumer relief.

In September 2016, Deutsche Bank received administrative subpoenas from the Maryland Attorney General seeking
information concerning Deutsche Bank’s RMBS and CDO businesses from 2002 to 2009. On June 1, 2017, Deutsche Bank
and the Maryland Attorney General reached a settlement to resolve the matter for U.S.$ 15 million in cash and U.S.$ 80 million
in consumer relief (to be allocated from the overall U.S.$ 4.1 billion consumer relief obligation agreed to as part of Deutsche
Bank’s settlement with the DOJ).

On July 8, 2020, the DOJ-appointed monitor released his final report, validating that Deutsche Bank has fulfilled its U.S.$ 4.1
billion consumer relief obligations in its entirety, inclusive of the U.S.$ 80 million commitment to the State of Maryland.

The Group has recorded provisions with respect to some of the outstanding regulatory investigations but not others. The
Group has not disclosed the amount of these provisions because it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to
seriously prejudice the resolution of these matters.



                                                                                                                           284
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                27 – Provisions




Issuer and Underwriter Civil Litigation. Deutsche Bank has been named as defendant in numerous civil litigations brought by
private parties in connection with its various roles, including issuer or underwriter, in offerings of RMBS and other asset-backed
securities. These cases, described below, allege that the offering documents contained material misrepresentations and
omissions, including with regard to the underwriting standards pursuant to which the underlying mortgage loans were issued,
or assert that various representations or warranties relating to the loans were breached at the time of origination. The Group
has recorded provisions with respect to several of these civil cases, but has not recorded provisions with respect to all of these
matters. The Group has not disclosed the amount of these provisions because it has concluded that such disclosure can be
expected to prejudice seriously the resolution of these matters.

Deutsche Bank is a defendant in a class action relating to its role as one of the underwriters of six RMBS offerings issued by
Novastar Mortgage Corporation. No specific damages are alleged in the complaint. The lawsuit was brought by plaintiffs
representing a class of investors who purchased certificates in those offerings. The parties reached a settlement to resolve
the matter for a total of U.S.$ 165 million, a portion of which was paid by the Bank. On August 30, 2017, FHFA/Freddie Mac
filed an objection to the settlement and shortly thereafter appealed the district court’s denial of their request to stay settlement
approval proceedings, which appeal was resolved against FHFA/Freddie Mac. The court approved the settlement on March 7,
2019 over FHFA/Freddie Mac’s objections. FHFA filed its appeal on June 28, 2019, which is pending.

Deutsche Bank is a defendant in an action related to RMBS offerings brought by the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) as receiver for Citizens National Bank and Strategic Capital Bank (alleging an unspecified amount in
damages against all defendants). In this action, the appellate court reinstated claims previously dismissed on statute of
limitations grounds and petitions for rehearing and certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court were denied. On July 31, 2017, the
FDIC filed a second amended complaint, which defendants moved to dismiss on September 14, 2017. On October 18, 2019,
defendants’ motion to dismiss was denied. Discovery is ongoing.

In June 2014, HSBC, as trustee, brought an action in New York state court against Deutsche Bank to revive a prior action,
alleging that Deutsche Bank failed to repurchase mortgage loans in the ACE Securities Corp. 2006-SL2 RMBS offering. The
revival action was stayed during the pendency of an appeal of the dismissal of a separate action wherein HSBC, as trustee,
brought an action against Deutsche Bank alleging breaches of representations and warranties made by Deutsche Bank
concerning the mortgage loans in the same offering. On March 29, 2016, the court dismissed the revival action. Plaintiff
appealed and on July 8, 2019, plaintiff filed its opening appellate brief. On November 19, 2019, the appellate court affirmed
the dismissal. On December 19, 2019, plaintiff filed a motion to appeal to the New York Court of Appeals in the appeals court,
which was denied on February 13, 2020. On March 16, 2020, plaintiff petitioned the New York Court of Appeals for leave to
appeal, which was granted on September 1, 2020. The appeal has been fully briefed and remains pending.

Deutsche Bank is a defendant in cases concerning two RMBS trusts that were brought initially by RMBS investors and
subsequently by HSBC, as trustee, in New York state court. The cases allege breaches of loan-level representations and
warranties in the ACE Securities Corp. 2006-FM1 and ACE Securities Corp. 2007-ASAP1 RMBS offerings, respectively. Both
cases were dismissed on statute of limitations grounds by the trial court on March 28, 2018. Plaintiff appealed the dismissals.
On April 25, 2019, the First Department affirmed the dismissals on claims for breach of representations and warranties and
for breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, but reversed the denial of the motions for leave to file amended
complaints alleging failure to notify the trustee of alleged representations and warranty breaches. HSBC filed amended
complaints on April 30, 2019, and Deutsche Bank filed its answers on June 3, 2019. Discovery is ongoing. On October 25,
2019, plaintiffs filed two complaints seeking to revive, under Section 205(a) of the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules, the
breach of representations and warranties claims as to which dismissal was affirmed in the case concerning ACE 2006-FM1.
On December 16, 2019, Deutsche Bank moved to dismiss these actions.

In the actions against Deutsche Bank solely as an underwriter of other issuers’ RMBS offerings, Deutsche Bank has
contractual rights to indemnification from the issuers, but those indemnity rights may in whole or in part prove effectively
unenforceable where the issuers are now or may in the future be in bankruptcy or otherwise defunct.

Trustee Civil Litigation. Deutsche Bank National Trust Company (“DBNTC”) and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas
(“DBTCA”) (collectively, the “Trustees”) are defendants in three separate civil lawsuits, and DBNTC is a defendant in a fourth
civil lawsuit, brought by investors concerning the Trustees’ role as trustees of certain RMBS trusts. The actions generally
allege claims for breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, breach of the duty to avoid conflicts of interest, negligence and/or
violations of the U.S. Trust Indenture Act of 1939, based on the Trustees’ alleged failure to perform adequately certain
obligations and/or duties as trustee for the trusts.

The four lawsuits include actions by (a) the National Credit Union Administration Board (“NCUA”), as an investor in 18 trusts
that allegedly suffered total realized collateral losses of more than U.S.$ 3.7 billion; (b) certain CDOs (collectively, “Phoenix
Light”) that hold RMBS certificates issued by 43 RMBS trusts, and seeking “hundreds of millions of dollars in damages”; (c)
Commerzbank AG, as an investor in 50 RMBS trusts, seeking “hundreds of millions of dollars in losses”; and (d) IKB
International, S.A. in Liquidation and IKB Deutsche Industriebank A.G. (collectively, “IKB”), as an investor in 22 RMBS trusts,
seeking more than U.S.$ 268 million of damages. In the NCUA case, DBNTC’s motion to dismiss the amended complaint was



                                                                                                                              285
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                              27 – Provisions




granted in part and denied in part, dismissing NCUA’s tort claims but preserving its breach-of-contract claims. On January 27,
2021, the court in the IKB case granted in part and denied in part the Trustees’ motion to dismiss, dismissing certain of IKB’s
claims but allowing most of its breach of contract and tort claims to go forward; on May 10, 2021, the Trustees filed a notice
of appeal regarding certain aspects of that order and, on May 20, 2021, IKB filed a notice of cross-appeal with respect to other
aspects of that order. Discovery is ongoing. On February 8, 2022, the court in the Phoenix Light case granted DBNTC’s and
DBTCA’s motion for summary judgment, denied Phoenix Light’s motion for summary judgment, and dismissed the action. On
February 8, 2022, the court in the Commerzbank case granted in part and denied in part DBNTC’s and DBTCA’s motion for
summary judgment, dismissing all of the tort claims and dismissing the breach of contract claim relating to many of the trusts,
and denied Commerzbank’s motion for summary judgment in its entirety.

The Group has established contingent liabilities with respect to certain of these matters, but the Group has not disclosed the
amounts because it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to seriously prejudice the outcome of these matters.

Polish Mortgage Matters. Starting in 2016, certain clients of Deutsche Bank Polska S.A. have reached out to Deutsche Bank
Polska S.A. alleging that their mortgage loan agreements in foreign currency include unfair clauses and are invalid. These
clients have demanded reimbursement of the alleged overpayments under such agreements totaling over € 250 million with
more than 2,000 civil claims having been commenced in Polish courts. This type of cases is an industry wide issue in Poland
and other banks are facing similar claims. Deutsche Bank Polska S.A. has and will take necessary legal actions to defend
itself and challenge such claims in courts.

The Group has established a portfolio provision to cover potential losses from the existing and potential lit igation related to
mortgage loans in foreign currency. The amount of the portfolio provision is approximately € 165 million and may be subject
to future changes in estimate depending in particular on the jurisprudence of local courts as well as the Court o f Justice of
European Union.

Postbank Voluntary Public Takeover Offer. On September 12, 2010, Deutsche Bank announced the decision to make a
voluntary takeover offer for the acquisition of all shares in Deutsche Postbank AG (Postbank). On October 7, 2010, the Bank
published its official takeover offer and offered Postbank shareholders a consideration of € 25 for each Postbank share. This
offer was accepted for a total of approximately 48.2 million Postbank shares.

In November 2010, a former shareholder of Postbank, Effecten-Spiegel AG, which had accepted the takeover offer, brought
a claim against Deutsche Bank alleging that the offer price was too low and was not determined in accordance with the
applicable German laws. The plaintiff alleges that Deutsche Bank had been obliged to make a mandatory takeover offer for
all shares in Postbank, at the latest, in 2009 as the voting rights of Deutsche Post AG in Postbank had to be attributed to
Deutsche Bank pursuant to Section 30 of the German Takeover Act. Based thereon, the plaintiff alleges that the consideration
offered by Deutsche Bank for the shares in Postbank in the 2010 voluntary takeover offer needed to be raised to € 57.25 per
share.

The Regional Court Cologne (Landgericht) dismissed the claim in 2011 and the Cologne appellate court dismissed the appeal
in 2012. The Federal Court set this judgment aside and referred the case back to the Higher Regional Court Cologne to take
evidence on certain allegations of the plaintiff.

Starting in 2014, additional former shareholders of Postbank, who accepted the 2010 tender offer, brought similar claims as
Effecten-Spiegel AG against Deutsche Bank which are pending with the Regional Court Cologne and the Higher Regional
Court of Cologne, respectively. On October 20, 2017, the Regional Court Cologne handed down a decision granting the claims
in a total of 14 cases which were combined in one proceeding. The Regional Court Cologne took the view that Deutsche Bank
was obliged to make a mandatory takeover offer already in 2008 so that the appropriate consideration to be offered in the
takeover offer should have been € 57.25 per Postbank share (instead of € 25). The additional consideration per share owed
to shareholders which have accepted the takeover offer would thus amount to € 32.25. Deutsche Bank appealed this decision
and the appeal was assigned to the 13th Senate of the Higher Regional Court of Cologne, which also heard the appeal of
Effecten-Spiegel AG.

In 2019 and 2020 the Higher Regional Court Cologne called a number of witnesses in both cases. The individuals heard
included current and former board members of Deutsche Bank, Deutsche Post AG and Postbank as well as other persons
involved in the Postbank transaction. In addition, the Higher Regional Court Cologne issued orders for the production of
relevant transaction documents entered into between Deutsche Bank and Deutsche Post AG in 2008 and 2009. Deutsche
Bank had therefore deposited the originals of these documents with the court in 2019.




                                                                                                                          286
Deutsche Bank                                   Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                              27 – Provisions




On December 16, 2020, the Higher Regional Court Cologne handed down a decision and fully dismissed the claims of
Effecten-Spiegel AG. Further, in a second decision handed down on December 16, 2020, the Higher Regional Court Cologne
allowed the appeal of Deutsche Bank against the decision of the Regional Court Cologne dated October 20, 2017 and
dismissed all related claims of the relevant plaintiffs. The Higher Regional Court Cologne has granted leave to appeal to the
German Federal Court (Bundesgerichtshof) as regards both decisions and all relevant plaintiffs have lodged their respective
appeals with the Federal Court end of January and beginning of February 2021, respectively. Until October 15, 2021 the
plaintiffs filed their reasonings of the appeal with the German Federal Court.

Deutsche Bank has been served with a large number of additional lawsuits filed against Deutsche Bank shortly before the end
of 2017, almost all of which are now pending with the Regional Court Cologne. Some of the new plaintiffs allege that the
consideration offered by Deutsche Bank AG for the shares in Postbank in the 2010 voluntary takeover should be raised to
€ 64.25 per share.

The claims for payment against Deutsche Bank in relation to these matters total almost € 700 million (excluding interest).

The Group has established a contingent liability with respect to these matters but the Group has not disclosed the amount of
this contingent liability because it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to prejudice seriously the outcome of
these matters.

Further Proceedings Relating to the Postbank Takeover. In September 2015, former shareholders of Postbank filed in the
Regional Court Cologne shareholder actions against Postbank to set aside the squeeze-out resolution taken in the
shareholders meeting of Postbank in August 2015 (actions for voidance). Among other things, the plaintiffs alleged that
Deutsche Bank was subject to a suspension of voting rights with respect to its shares in Postbank based on the allegation
that Deutsche Bank failed to make a mandatory takeover offer. The squeeze out is final and the proceeding itself has no
reversal effect, but may result in damage payments. The claimants refer to legal arguments similar to those asserted in the
Effecten-Spiegel proceeding described above. In a decision on October 20, 2017, the Regional Court Cologne declared the
squeeze-out resolution to be void. The court, however, did not rely on a suspension of voting rights due to an alleged failure
of Deutsche Bank to make a mandatory takeover offer, but argued that Postbank violated information rights of Postbank
shareholders in Postbank's shareholders meeting in August 2015. Postbank has appealed this decision. On May 15, 2020 DB
Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (legal successor of Postbank due to a merger in 2018) was merged into Deutsche Bank
AG. On July 3, 2020 Deutsche Bank AG withdrew the appeal as regards the actions for voidance because efforts and costs
to pursue this appeal became disproportionate to the minor remaining economic importance of the case considering that the
2015 squeeze-out cannot be reversed. As a consequence, the first instance judgement which found that Postbank violated
the information rights of its shareholders in the shareholders’ meeting has now become final.

The legal question of whether Deutsche Bank had been obliged to make a mandatory takeover offer for all Postbank shares
prior to its 2010 voluntary takeover may also impact two pending appraisal proceedings (Spruchverfahren). These proceedings
were initiated by former Postbank shareholders with the aim to increase the cash compensation offered in connection with the
squeeze-out of Postbank shareholders in 2015 and the cash compensation offered and annual compensation paid in
connection with the execution of a domination and profit and loss transfer agreement (Beherrschungs- und
Gewinnabführungsvertrag) between DB Finanz-Holding AG (now DB Beteiligungs-Holding GmbH) and Postbank in 2012.

The applicants in the appraisal proceedings claim that a potential obligation of Deutsche Bank to make a mandatory takeover
offer for Postbank at an offer price of € 57.25 should be decisive when determining the adequate cash compensation in the
appraisal proceedings. The Regional Court Cologne had originally followed this legal view of the applicants in two resolutions.
In a decision dated June 2019, the Regional Court Cologne expressly gave up this legal view in the appraisal proceedings in
connection with execution of a domination and profit and loss transfer agreement. According to this decision, the question
whether Deutsche Bank was obliged to make a mandatory offer for all Postbank shares prior to its voluntary takeover offer
in 2010 shall not be relevant for determining the appropriate cash compensation. It is likely that the Regional Court Cologne
will take the same legal position in the appraisal proceedings in connection with the squeeze-out. On October 1, 2020, the
Regional Court Cologne handed down a decision in the appraisal proceeding concerning the domination and profit and loss
transfer agreement (dated December 5, 2012) according to which the annual compensation pursuant to Section 304 of the
German Stock Corporation Act (jährliche Ausgleichszahlung) shall be increased by € 0.12 to € 1.78 per Postbank share and
the settlement amount pursuant to Section 305 of the German Stock Corporation Act (Abfindungsbetrag) shall be increased
by € 4.56 to € 29.74 per Postbank share. The increase of the settlement amount is of relevance for approximately 492.000
former Postbank shares whereas the increase of the annual compensation is of relevance for approximately 7 million former
Postbank shares. Deutsche Bank as well as the applicants have lodged an appeal against this decision.

The Group has not disclosed whether it has established a provision or contingent liability with respect to this matter because
it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to prejudice seriously its outcome.




                                                                                                                         287
Deutsche Bank                                     Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                27 – Provisions




Russia/UK Equities Trading Investigation. Deutsche Bank has investigated the circumstances around equity trades entered
into by certain clients with Deutsche Bank in Moscow and London. The total volume of transactions reviewed is significant.
Deutsche Bank's internal investigation of potential violations of law, regulation and policy and into the related internal control
environment has concluded, and Deutsche Bank has assessed the findings identified during the investigation; to date it has
identified certain violations of Deutsche Bank’s policies and deficiencies in Deutsche Bank's control environment. Deutsche
Bank has advised regulators and law enforcement authorities in several jurisdictions (including Germany, Russia, the UK and
the United States) of this investigation. Deutsche Bank has taken disciplinary measures with regards to certain individuals in
this matter.

On January 30, 2017, the DFS and the FCA announced settlements with the Bank related to their investigations into this
matter. The settlements conclude the DFS’s and the FCA’s investigations into the Bank’s AML control function in its investment
banking division, including in relation to the equity trading described above. Under the terms of the settlement agreement the
DFS issued a Consent Order pursuant to which Deutsche Bank agreed to pay a civil monetary penalty of U.S.$ 425 million
and to engage an independent monitor for a term of up to two years. Under the terms of the settlement agreement with the
FCA, Deutsche Bank agreed to pay a civil monetary penalty of approximately GBP 163 million. On May 30, 2017, the Federal
Reserve announced its settlement with the Bank resolving this matter as well as additional AML issues identified by the Federal
Reserve. Deutsche Bank paid a penalty of U.S.$ 41 million. Deutsche Bank also agreed to retain independent third parties to
assess its Bank Secrecy Act/AML program and review certain foreign correspondent banking activity of its subsidiary Deutsche
Bank Trust Company Americas. The Bank was required to submit written remediation plans and programs.

Deutsche Bank continues to cooperate with regulators and law enforcement authorities, including the DOJ which has its own
investigation into these securities trades that is understood to be ongoing. The Group has recorded a provision with respect
to the remaining investigation. The Group has not disclosed the amount of this provision because it has concluded that such
disclosure can be expected to prejudice seriously the outcome of this matter.

Sovereign, Supranational and Agency Bonds (SSA) Investigations and L itigations. Deutsche Bank has received inquiries
from certain regulatory and law enforcement authorities, including requests for information and documents, pertaining to SSA
bond trading. Deutsche Bank is cooperating with these investigations.

On December 20, 2018, the European Commission sent a Statement of Objections to Deutsche Bank regarding a potential
breach of EU antitrust rules in relation to secondary market trading of SSA bonds denominated in U.S. dollars, Deutsche Bank
proactively cooperated with the European Commission in this matter and as a result was granted immunity. On April 28, 2020,
the European Commission issued its decision, finding that Deutsche Bank and three other banks breached EU antitrust rules.
However, in accordance with the European Commission’s guidelines, no fine was imposed on Deutsche Bank given its
immunity status.

Deutsche Bank is a defendant in several putative class action complaints filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District
of New York by alleged direct and indirect market participants claiming violations of antitrust law and common law related to
alleged manipulation of the secondary trading market for SSA bonds. Deutsche Bank reached an agreement to settle the
actions by direct market participants for the amount of U.S.$ 48.5 million and recorded a provision in the same amount. The
settlement received final court approval on April 2, 2021. The action filed on behalf of alleged indirect market participants was
voluntarily dismissed by the plaintiffs.

Deutsche Bank is also a defendant in putative class actions filed on November 7, 2017 and December 5, 2017 in the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice and Federal Court of Canada, respectively, claiming violations of antitrust law and the common law
relating to alleged manipulation of secondary trading of SSA bonds. The complaints rely on allegations similar to those in the
U.S. class actions involving SSA bond trading, and seek compensatory and punitive damages. The cases are in their early
stages.

Deutsche Bank was named as a defendant in a consolidated putative class action filed in the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York alleging violations of U.S. antitrust law and a claim for unjust enrichment relating to Mexican
government bond trading. In October 2019, the court granted defendants’ motion to dismiss plaintiffs’ consolidated amended
complaint without prejudice. In December 2019, plaintiffs filed a Second Amended Complaint, which the court dismissed
without prejudice on November 30, 2020. On May 20, 2021, plaintiffs filed a motion for reconsideration. On January 22, 2021,
Deutsche Bank was notified that the Mexican competition authority, COFECE, reached a resolution that imposes fines against
DB Mexico and two of its former traders, as well as six other financial institutions and nine other traders, for engaging in
alleged monopolistic practices in the Mexican government bond secondary market. DB Mexico has appealed. The fine against
DB Mexico was approximately U.S.$ 427,000.




                                                                                                                             288
Deutsche Bank                                      Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                 27 – Provisions




Deutsche Bank was also named as a defendant in several putative class action complaints filed in the U.S. District Court for
the Southern District of New York alleging violations of antitrust law and common law related to alleged manipulation of the
secondary trading market for U.S. Agency bonds; on September 3, 2019, the court denied a motion to dismiss the complaint.
Deutsche Bank has reached an agreement to settle the class actions for the amount of U.S.$ 15 million, which amount was
already fully reflected in existing litigation reserves and no additional provision was taken for this settlement amount. The court
granted preliminary approval over the settlement on October 29, 2019, supported by an opinion issued November 8, 2019.
The court held a final fairness hearing on June 9, 2020. On June 18, 2020, the court entered final judgement approving the
class action settlement with Deutsche Bank and separately as to the class action settlements with the other defendants which
will result in a total of U.S.$ 386.5 million paid to the settlement class. A separate action was filed in the U.S. District Court for
the Middle District of Louisiana on September 23, 2019, which was dismissed with prejudice as to Deutsche Bank by stipulation
of the parties on October 30, 2019.

Other than as noted above, the Group has not disclosed whether it has established provisions or contingent liabilities with
respect to the matters referred to above because it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to prejudice seriously
their outcome.

US Treasury Securities Investigations. Deutsche Bank has received inquiries from certain regulatory and law enforcement
authorities, including requests for information and documents, pertaining to U.S. Treasuries auctions, trading, and relate d
market activity. Deutsche Bank has cooperated with these investigations.

Deutsche Bank‘s subsidiary Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. (DBSI) was a defendant in several putative class actions alleging
violations of U.S. antitrust law, the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act and common law related to the alleged manipulation of the
U.S. Treasury securities market. These cases have been consolidated in the Southern District of New York. On November 16,
2017, plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint, which did not name DBSI as a defendant. On December 11, 2017,
the court dismissed DBSI from the class action without prejudice. On March 31, 2021, the court granted the defendants’ motion
to dismiss. On May 14, 2021, the plaintiffs filed a second amended complaint, which also did not name DBSI as a defendant.

On June 18, 2020, the CFTC entered an order pursuant to settlement with DBSI for alleged spoofing by two Tokyo-based
traders between January and December 2013. Without admitting or denying the findings or conclusions therein, Deutsche
Bank consented to the entry of the order, including a civil monetary fine of U.S.$ 1.25 million.

US Treasury Spoofing Litigation. Following the Bank’s settlement with the CFTC five separate putative class actions were
filed in the Northern District of Illinois against Deutsche Bank AG and DBSI. The cases allege that Deutsche Bank and other
unnamed entities participated in a scheme from January to December 2013 to spoof the market for Treasuries futures and
options contracts and Eurodollars futures and options contracts. Plaintiffs filed a consolidated complaint on November 13,
2020. Deutsche Bank AG and DBSI filed a motion to dismiss on January 15, 2021; briefing on the motion to dismiss concluded
on April 16, 2021. On September 20, 2021, the judge ordered supplemental briefing on the issues of Article III standing and
jurisdictional discovery. Plaintiffs filed their opening brief on October 11, 2021, with briefing complete on November 1, 2021.

The Group has not disclosed whether it has established a provision or contingent liability with respect to these matters because
it has concluded that such disclosure can be expected to prejudice seriously their outcome.




                                                                                                                               289
Deutsche Bank                                        Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                   28 – Credit related Commitments and Contingent Liabilities




28 – Credit related Commitments and Contingent Liabilities
Irrevocable lending commitments and lending related contingent liabilities
In the normal course of business the Group regularly enters into irrevocable lending commitments, including fronting
commitments as well as contingent liabilities consisting of financial and performance guarantees, standby letters of credit and
indemnity agreements on behalf of its customers. Under these contracts the Group is required to perform under an obligation
agreement or to make payments to the beneficiary based on third party’s failure to meet its obligations. For these instruments
it is not known to the Group in detail if, when and to what extent claims will be made. In the event that the Group has to pay
out cash in respect of its fronting commitments, the Group would immediately seek reimbursement from the other syndicate
lenders. The Group considers all the above instruments in monitoring the credit exposure and may require collateral to mitigate
inherent credit risk. If the credit risk monitoring provides sufficient perception about a loss from an expected claim, a provision
is established and recorded on the balance sheet.

The following table shows the Group’s revocable lending commitments, irrevocable lending commitments and lending related
contingent liabilities without considering collateral or provisions. It shows the maximum potential utilization of the Group in
case all these liabilities entered into must be fulfilled. The table therefore does not show the expected future cash flows from
these liabilities as many of them will expire without being drawn and arising claims will be honored by the customers or can
be recovered from proceeds of arranged collateral.

Irrevocable lending commitments and lending related contingent liabilities
in € m.                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Irrevocable lending commitments                                                                                      177,334        165,643
Revocable lending commitments                                                                                         49,798         50,233
Contingent liabilities                                                                                                59,394         47,978
Total                                                                                                                286,525        263,854



Other commitments and other contingent liabilities
The following table shows the Group’s other irrevocable commitments and other contingent liabilities without considering
collateral or provisions. It shows the maximum potential utilization of the Group in case all these liabilities entered into must
be fulfilled. The table therefore does not show the expected future cash flows from these liabilities as many of them will expire
without being drawn and arising claims will be honored by the customers or can be recovered from proceeds of arranged
collateral.

Other commitments and other contingent liabilities
in € m.                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Other commitments                                                                                                         163            144
Other contingent liabilities                                                                                               77             73
Total                                                                                                                     240            217



Government Assistance
In the course of its business, the Group regularly applies for and receives government support by means of Export Credit
Agency (“ECA”) guarantees covering transfer and default risks for the financing of exports and investments into Emerging
Markets and to a lesser extent, developed markets for Structured Trade & Export Finance and short- and medium-term Trade
Finance business. Almost all export-oriented states have established such ECAs to support their domestic exporters. The
ECAs act in the name and on behalf of the government of their respective country and are either constituted directly as
governmental departments or organized as private companies vested with the official mandate of the government to act on its
behalf. Terms and conditions of such ECA guarantees are broadly similar due to the fact that most of the ECAs act within the
scope of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (“OECD”) consensus rules. The OECD consensus
rules, an intergovernmental agreement of the OECD member states, define benchmarks intended to ensure that a fair
competition between different exporting nations will take place.




                                                                                                                                       290
Deutsche Bank                                                          Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                     30 – Long-Term Debt and Trust Preferred Securities




In some countries dedicated funding programs with governmental support are offered for ECA-covered financings. The Group
makes use of such programs to assist its clients in the financing of exported goods and services. In certain financings, the
Group also receives government guarantees from national and international governmental institutions as collateral to support
financings in the interest of the respective governments. The majority of such ECA guarantees received by the Group were
issued either by Korean Export Credit Agencies (Korea Trade Insurance Corporation and The Export-Import Bank of Korea)
acting on behalf of the Republic of Korea, by the Euler-Hermes Kreditversicherungs-AG acting on behalf of the Federal
Republic of Germany, by the UK Export Finance Agency acting on behalf of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland or by the Italian Export Credit Agency (SACE S.p.A.) acting on behalf of the Italian Republic.


Irrevocable payment commitments with regard to levies
Irrevocable payment commitments related to bank levy according to Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), the
Single Resolution Fund (SRF) and the German deposit protection amounted to € 1,078.8 million as of December 31, 2021,
and to € 915.6 million as of December 31, 2020.


29 – Other Short-Term Borrowings
in € m.                                                                                                                                 Dec 31, 2021     Dec 31, 2020
Other short-term borrowings:
Commercial paper                                                                                                                              1,840            1,748
Other                                                                                                                                         2,194            1,804
Total other short-term borrowings                                                                                                             4,034            3,553




30 – Long-Term Debt and Trust Preferred Securities
Long-Term Debt by Earliest Contractual Maturity
                                                                                                                                                 Total          Total
                                               Due in            Due in           Due in          Due in          Due in    Due after          Dec 31,        Dec 31,
in € m.                                         2022              2023             2024            2025            2026        2026              2021           2020
Senior debt:
Bonds and notes:
  Fixed rate                                   9,053            11,529          10,179            5,791           9,986      16,909            63,446        66,4021
  Floating rate                                3,134             1,373           2,327            3,243           3,234       4,871            18,182        26,9901
Other                                         37,217             3,597           6,853              791             752       4,749            53,960        48,103
Subordinated debt:
Bonds and notes:
  Fixed rate                                      14                33              74           2,623           1,967        2,479             7,191         6,049
  Floating rate                                    0             1,197              21             194               0            0             1,412         1,303
Other                                             15               103              88               0              42           46               293           316
Total long-term debt                          49,434            17,832          19,542          12,643          15,980       29,054           144,485       149,163
1
    Prior years' comparatives aligned to presentation in the current year.


The Group did not have any defaults of principal, interest or other breaches with respect to its liabilities in 2021 and 2020.

Trust Preferred Securities1
in € m.                                                                                                                                 Dec 31, 2021     Dec 31, 2020
Fixed rate                                                                                                                                        0              269
Floating rate                                                                                                                                   528            1,052
Total trust preferred securities                                                                                                                528            1,321
1
    Perpetual instruments, redeemable at specific future dates at the Group’s option.




                                                                                                                                                               291
Deutsche Bank                                                       Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                  31 – Maturity Analysis of the earliest contractual undiscounted cash flows of Financial Liabilities




31 – Maturity Analysis of the earliest contractual undiscounted
cash flows of Financial Liabilities
                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                         Due between
                                                                                                       Due within            3 and 12         Due between               Due after
in € m.                                                                         On demand               3 months              months          1 and 5 years              5 years
Noninterest bearing deposits                                                      225,782                     0                     0                    0                    0
Interest bearing deposits                                                         168,927               118,909                70,899               12,195               10,015
Trading liabilities¹                                                               54,676                     0                     0                    0                    0
Negative market values from derivative financial
instruments¹                                                                      287,108                       0                    0                     0                    0
Financial liabilities designated at fair value
through profit or loss                                                              30,911                 7,582               16,764                2,249                 2,438
Investment contract liabilities²                                                         0                     0                  562                    0                     0
Negative market values from derivative financial
instruments qualifying for hedge accounting³                                            0                   678                  423                   286                   79
Central bank funds purchased                                                            0                     0                    0                     0                    0
Securities sold under repurchase agreements                                           227                    33                   40                   448                    8
Securities loaned                                                                      24                     0                    0                     0                    0
Other short-term borrowings                                                         2,676                   953                  607                     0                    0
Long-term debt                                                                          0                36,692               14,770                71,239               31,449
Trust preferred securities                                                              0                     0                  529                     0                    0
Lease liabilities                                                                      37                   142                  503                 1,750                2,082
Other financial liabilities                                                        78,311                 3,225                  337                   456                   12
Off-balance sheet loan commitments                                                175,114                     0                    0                     0                    0
Financial guarantees                                                               24,024                     0                    0                     0                    0
Total⁴                                                                          1,047,818               168,213              105,435                88,624               46,084
1
  Trading liabilities and derivatives not qualifying for hedge accounting balances are recorded at fair value. The Group believes that this best represents the cash flow that would
  have to be paid if these positions had to be closed out. Trading liabilities and derivatives not qualifying for hedge accounting balances are shown within “on demand” which
  Group’s management believes most accurately reflects the short-term nature of trading activities. The contractual maturity of the instruments may however extend over
  significantly longer periods.
2
  These are investment contracts where the policy terms and conditions result in their redemption value equaling fair value.
3
  Derivatives designated for hedge accounting are recorded at fair value and are shown in the time bucket at which the hedged relationship is expected to terminate.
4
  The balances in the table do not agree to the numbers in the Group’s balance sheet as the cash flows included in the table are undiscounted. This analysis represents the
  worst case scenario for the Group if the Group was required to repay all liabilities earlier than expected. The Group believes that the likelihood of such an event occurring is
  remote.




                                                                                                                                                                            292
Deutsche Bank                                                         Notes to the consolidated balance sheet
Annual Report 2021                                                    31 – Maturity Analysis of the earliest contractual undiscounted cash flows of Financial Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                      Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                                                           Due between
                                                                                                         Due within            3 and 12         Due between               Due after
in € m.                                                                           On demand               3 months              months          1 and 5 years              5 years
Noninterest bearing deposits                                                         220,646                    0                     0                    0                    0
Interest bearing deposits                                                            154,863              105,566                64,784               13,815               10,230
Trading liabilities¹                                                                  44,289                    0                     0                    0                    0
Negative market values from derivative financial
instruments¹                                                                         327,775                      0                    0                     0                    0
Financial liabilities designated at fair value
through profit or loss                                                                23,692               16,204                 3,451                2,127                 2,095
Investment contract liabilities²                                                           0                    0                   526                    0                     0
Negative market values from derivative financial
instruments qualifying for hedge accounting³                                              0                   354                   66                   319                  541
Central bank funds purchased                                                              0                     0                    0                     0                    0
Securities sold under repurchase agreements                                           1,815                    17                    0                   504                    1
Securities loaned                                                                     1,697                     1                    0                     0                    0
Other short-term borrowings                                                           1,385                   919                1,530                     0                    0
Long-term debt                                                                            1                14,430               48,164                68,130               31,637
Trust preferred securities                                                                0                     0                1,345                     0                    0
Lease liabilities                                                                        49                   128                  522                 1,804                2,064
Other financial liabilities                                                          86,618                 2,565                  225                   501                   16
Off-balance sheet loan commitments                                                  164,843                     0                    0                     0                    0
Financial guarantees                                                                 20,337                     0                    0                     0                    0
Total⁴                                                                            1,048,009               140,182              120,611                87,200               46,584
1
    Trading liabilities and derivatives not qualifying for hedge accounting balances are recorded at fair value. The Group believes that this best represents the cash flow that would
    have to be paid if these positions had to be closed out. Trading liabilities and derivatives not qualifying for hedge accounting balances are shown within “on demand” which
    Group’s management believes most accurately reflects the short-term nature of trading activities. The contractual maturity of the instruments may however extend over
    significantly longer periods.
2
    These are investment contracts where the policy terms and conditions result in their redemption value equaling fair value.
3
    Derivatives designated for hedge accounting are recorded at fair value and are shown in the time bucket at which the hedged relationship is expected to terminate.
4
    The balances in the table do not agree to the numbers in the Group’s balance sheet as the cash flows included in the table are undiscounted. This analysis represents the
    worst case scenario for the Group if the Group was required to repay all liabilities earlier than expected. The Group believes that the likelihood of such an event occurring is
    remote.




                                                                                                                                                                              293
Deutsche Bank                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                     32 – Common Shares




Additional Notes

32 – Common Shares
Common Shares
Deutsche Bank’s share capital consists of common shares issued in registered form without par value. Under German law,
each share represents an equal stake in the subscribed capital. Therefore, each share has a nominal value of € 2.56, derived
by dividing the total amount of share capital by the number of shares.



                                                                                                    Issued and
Number of shares                                                                                      fully paid   Treasury shares       Outstanding
Common shares, January 1, 2020                                                                 2,066,773,131            (671,357)    2,066,101,774
Shares issued under share-based compensation plans                                                         0                   0                 0
Capital increase                                                                                           0                   0                 0
Shares purchased for treasury                                                                              0         (35,058,705)      (35,058,705)
Shares sold or distributed from treasury                                                                   0          34,383,896        34,383,896
Common shares, December 31, 2020                                                               2,066,773,131          (1,346,166)    2,065,426,965
Shares issued under share-based compensation plans                                                         0                   0                 0
Capital increase                                                                                           0                   0                 0
Shares purchased for treasury                                                                              0         (35,979,884)      (35,979,884)
Shares sold or distributed from treasury                                                                   0          36,647,102        36,647,102
Common shares, December 31, 2021                                                               2,066,773,131            (678,948)    2,066,094,183


There are no issued ordinary shares that have not been fully paid.

Shares purchased for treasury mainly consist of shares purchased with the intention of being resold in the short-term as well
as held by the Group for a period of time. In addition, the Group has bought back shares for equity compensation purposes.
All such transactions were recorded in shareholders’ equity and no revenues and expenses were recorded in connection with
these activities. Treasury stock held as of year-end will mainly be used for future share-based compensation.


Authorized Capital
The Management Board is authorized to increase the share capital by issuing new shares for cash consideration. As of
December 31, 2021, Deutsche Bank AG had authorized but unissued capital of € 2,560,000,000 which may be issued in whole
or in part until April 30, 2026. Further details are governed by Section 4 of the Articles of Association.

Authorized capital   Consideration      Pre-emptive rights                                                                      Expiration date
€ 512,000,000        Cash               May be excluded pursuant to Section 186 (3) sentence 4 of the Stock Corporation Act April 30, 2026
                                        and may be excluded in so far as it is necessary to grant pre-emptive rights to the
                                        holders of option rights, convertible bonds and convertible participatory rights
€ 2,048,000,000      Cash               May be excluded in so far as it is necessary to grant pre-emptive rights to the holders April 30, 2026
                                        of option rights, convertible bonds and convertible participatory rights.




                                                                                                                                                  294
Deutsche Bank                                             Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                        33 – Employee Benefits




Conditional Capital
The Management Board is authorized to issue once or more than once, participatory notes that are linked with conversion
rights or option rights and/or convertible bonds and/or bonds with warrants. The participatory notes, convertible bonds or
bonds with warrants may also be issued by affiliated companies of Deutsche Bank AG. For this purpose share capital was
increased conditionally upon exercise of these conversion and/or exchange rights or upon mandatory conversion.

Conditional
capital        Purpose of conditional capital                                                                                              Expiration date
€ 512,000,000 May be used if holders of conversion or option rights that are linked with participatory notes or convertible bonds or bonds April 30, 2022
              with warrants make use of their conversion or option rights or holders with conversion obligations of convertible participatory
              notes or convertible bonds fulfill their obligation to convert.

€ 51,200,000   May be used to fulfill options that are awarded on or before the expiration date and will only be used to the extent that April 30, 2022
               holders of issued options make use of their right to receive shares and shares are not delivered out of treasury shares



Dividends
The following table presents the amount of dividends proposed or declared for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020
and 2019, respectively.

                                                                                                             2021
                                                                                                        (proposed)             2020               2019
Cash dividends declared (in € )                                                                      413,000,000                  0                  0
Cash dividends declared per common share (in €)                                                             0.20               0.00               0.00


No dividends have been declared since the balance sheet date.


33 – Employee Benefits
Share-Based Compensation Plans
The Group made grants of share-based compensation under the DB Equity Plan. This plan represents a contingent right to
receive Deutsche Bank common shares after a specified period of time. The award recipient is not entitled to receive dividends
during the vesting period of the award.

The share awards granted under the terms and conditions of the DB Equity Plan may be forfeited fully or partly if the recipient
voluntarily terminates employment before the end of the relevant vesting period (or release period for Upfront Awards). Vesting
usually continues after termination of employment in cases such as redundancy or retirement. Deferred share awards are
subject to forfeiture provisions and performance conditions until release.

In countries where legal or other restrictions hinder the delivery of shares, a cash plan variant of the DB Equity Plan was used
for granting awards, and for employees of certain legal entities, deferred equity is replaced with restricted shares due to local
regulatory requirements.

Please note that this table does not cover awards granted to the Management Board, and from 2018 this table does not cover
AIFMD/UCITS MRTs, or DWS Share-Based Compensation Payments, please refer to separate DWS section that covers
grants to this population.




                                                                                                                                                  295
Deutsche Bank                                                         Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                    33 – Employee Benefits




The following table sets forth the basic terms of these share plans:

Grant year(s)                   Deutsche Bank Equity Plan                       Vesting schedule                                   Eligibility
2019-2021                       Annual Award                                    1/4: 12 months1                                    Select employees as
                                                                                1/4: 24 months1                                    annual performance-based
                                                                                1/4: 36 months1                                    compensation
                                                                                                                                    (CB/IB/CRU and InstVV MRTs in an
                                                                                1/4: 48 months1
                                                                                                                                   MBU)2
                                Annual Award                                    1/3: 12 months1                                    Select employees as
                                                                                1/3: 24 months1                                    annual performance-based
                                                                                1/3: 36 months1                                    compensation (non-CB/IB/CRU)2

                                Annual Award                                    1/5: 12 months1                                    Select employees as
                                                                                1/5: 24 months1                                    annual performance-based
                                                                                1/5: 36 months1                                    compensation (Senior Management)
                                                                                1/5: 48 months1
                                                                                1/5: 60 months1
                                Retention/New Hire                              Individual specification                           Select employees to attract and
                                                                                                                                   retain the best talent
                                Annual Award – Upfront                          Vesting immediately at grant3                      Regulated employees
2017 -2018                      Annual Award                                    1/4: 12 months1                                    Select employees as
                                                                                1/4: 24 months1                                    annual performance-based
                                                                                1/4: 36 months1                                    compensation
                                                                                1/4: 48 months1
                                                                                Or cliff vesting after 54 months1                  Members of Senior Leadership Cadre
                                Retention/New Hire                              Individual specification                           Select employees to attract and retain
                                                                                                                                   the best talent
                                Key Retention Plan (KRP)4                       1/2: 50 months3                                    Material Risk Takers (MRTs)
                                                                                1/2: 62 months3
                                                                                Cliff vesting after 43 months                      Non-Material Risk Takers (non-MRTs)
2016                            Key Position Award (KPA)5                       Cliff-vesting after 4 years3                       Select employees as annual retention
1
    For InstVV-regulated employees (and Senior Management) a further retention period of twelve months applies (six months for awards granted from 2017 -2018).
2
    For grant year 2019 divisions were called CIB, for grant years 2020 and 2021 CIB is split into CB/IB/CRU.
3
    Share delivery takes place after a further retention period of twelve months.
4
    Equity-based awards granted under this plan in January 2017 were subject to an additional share price condition and were forfeited as a result of this condition not being met.
5
    A predefined proportion of the individual’s KPA was subject to an additional share price condition and was forfeited as a result of this condition not being met.


Furthermore, the Group offers a broad-based employee share ownership plan entitled Global Share Purchase Plan (“GSPP”).
The GSPP offers employees in specific countries the opportunity to purchase Deutsche Bank shares in monthly installments
over one year. At the end of the purchase cycle, the Group matches the acquired stock in a ratio of one to one up to a maximum
of ten free shares, provided that the employee remains at Deutsche Bank Group for another year. In total, about 11,838 staff
from 18 countries enrolled in the twelfth cycle that began in November 2021.

The Group has other local share-based compensation plans, none of which, individually or in the aggregate, are material to
the consolidated financial statements.

The following table sets out the movements in share award units, including grants under the cash plan variant of the DB Equity
Plan.

Share units (in thousands)                                                                                                                             2021                2020¹
Balance outstanding as of January 01                                                                                                               119,206              169,590
  Granted                                                                                                                                           50,554               45,269
  Released                                                                                                                                         (43,206)             (32,693)
  Forfeited                                                                                                                                         (4,537)             (62,518)
  Other movements                                                                                                                                     (200)                (441)
Balance outstanding as of December 31                                                                                                              121,818              119,206
1
    2020 share units restated


The DB Equity Plan includes awards with share price hurdles under both the Key Position Award and the Key Retention Plan.
The share price hurdle condition for both plans was measured during 2020 and was not met. As a result approximately 56
million share units were forfeited. In accordance with IFRS 2 the forfeiture due to a market performance condition did not result
in a reversal to the recorded expense.




                                                                                                                                                                           296
Deutsche Bank                                      Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                 33 – Employee Benefits




The following table sets out key information regarding awards granted, released and remaining in the year.

                                                                                          2021                                                         2020
                                                                                    Weighted             Weighted                                Weighted
                                            Weighted           Weighted               average          average fair         Weighted               average
                                          average fair    average share             remaining      value per award     average share             remaining
                                      value per award    price at release    contractual life in     granted in the   price at release    contractual life in
                                       granted in year             in year               years                 year             in year               years
DB Equity Plan                                € 9.25            € 10.58                       2            € 7.20             € 7.79                       2


Share-based payment transactions resulting in a cash payment give rise to a liability, which amounted to approximately
€ 8 million and € 8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

The grant volume of outstanding share awards was approximately € 0.9 billion and € 0.9 billion as of December 31, 2021 and
2020, respectively. Thereof, approximately € 0.7 billion and € 0.7 billion had been recognized as compensation expense in
the reporting year or prior to that. Hence, compensation expense for deferred share-based compensation not yet recognized
amounted to approximately € 0.2 billion and € 0.2 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

DWS Share-Based Compensation Plans

The DWS Group made grants of share-based compensation under the DWS Equity Plan. This plan represents a contingent
right to receive a cash payment by referencing to the value of DWS shares during a specified time period.

In September 2018 one-off IPO related awards under the DWS Stock Appreciation Rights (SAR) Plan were granted to all
DWS employees. A limited number of DWS senior managers were granted a one-off IPO-related Performance Share Unit
(PSU) under the DWS Equity Plan instead. For members of the Executive Board, one-off IPO-related awards under the DWS
Equity Plan were granted in January 2019.

The DWS SAR Plan represents a contingent right to receive a cash payment equal to any appreciation (or gain) in the value
of a set number of notional DWS shares over a fixed period of time. This award does not provide any entitlement to receive
DWS shares, voting rights or associated dividends.

The DWS Equity Plan is a phantom share plan representing a contingent right to receive a cash payment by referencing to
the value of DWS shares during a specified period of time.

The award recipient for any share-based compensation plan is not entitled to receive dividends during the vesting period of
the award.

The share awards granted under the terms and conditions of any share-based compensation plan are forfeited fully or partly
if the recipient voluntarily terminates employment before the end of the relevant vesting period (or the end of the retention
period for Upfront Awards). Vesting usually continues after termination of employment in cases such as redundancy or
retirement.




                                                                                                                                                      297
Deutsche Bank                                                       Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                  33 – Employee Benefits




The following table sets forth the basic terms of the DWS share-based plans:

Grant year(s)                Award Type                                       Vesting schedule                                  Eligibility
2021                         Annual Awards                                    1/4: 12 months1                                   Select employees as annual
                                                                              1/4: 24 months1                                   performance-based
                                                                              1/4: 36 months1                                   compensation (InstVV MRTs)
                                                                              1/4: 48 months1
                             Annual Awards                                    1/3: 12 months1                                   Select employees as annual
                                                                              1/3: 24 months1                                   performance-based
                                                                              1/3: 36 months1                                   compensation (non-InstVV MRTs)
                             Annual Awards (Senior Management)                1/5: 12 months1                                   Members of the Executive Board
                                                                              1/5: 24 months1
                                                                              1/5: 36 months1
                                                                              1/5: 48 months1
                                                                              1/5: 60 months1
                             Annual Award - Upfront                           Vesting immediately at grant1                     Regulated employees
                             Retention/New Hire                               Individual specification                          Select employees to attract and retain
                                                                                                                                the best talent
2019-2020                    Annual Awards                                    1/3: 12 months1                                   Select employees as annual
                                                                                                                                performance-based
                                                                              1/3: 24 months1                                   compensation
                                                                              1/3: 36 months1
                             Annual Awards (Senior Management)                1/5: 12 months1                                   Members of the Executive Board
                                                                              1/5: 24 months1
                                                                              1/5: 36 months1
                                                                              1/5: 48 months1
                                                                              1/5: 60 months1
                             Annual Award - Upfront                           Vesting immediately at grant1                     Regulated employees
                             Retention/New Hire                               Individual specification                          Select employees to attract and retain
                                                                                                                                the best talent
                             Performance Share Unit (PSU) Award               1/3: March 20221                                  Members of the Executive Board
                             (one-off IPO related award granted in            1/3: March 20231
                             2019)
                                                                              1/3: March 20241
2018                         Retention/New Hire                               Individual specification                          Select employees to attract and retain
                                                                                                                                the best talent
                             Performance Share Unit (PSU) Award               1/3: March 20221                                  Select Senior Managers
                             (one-off IPO related award )1                    1/3: March 20231
                                                                              1/3: March 20241
                             SAR Award (one-off IPO related award)            For non-MRTs:                                     all DWS employees2
                                                                              1 June 20213
                                                                              For MRTs:
                                                                              1 March 20231,3
1
    Depending on their individual regulatory status, a six months retention period (AIFMD/UCITS MRTs) or a 12-months retention period (InstVV MRTs) applies after vesting.
2
    Unless the employee received PSU Award.
3
    In 2020, two Early Exercise windows were offered to non-MRTs leading to accelerated vesting and exercise upon acceptance. For outstanding awards, a 4-year exercise
    period applies following vesting/retention period.


The following table sets out the movements in share award units.

                                                                          DWS Equity Plan                                                                    DWS SAR Plan
                                                                 2021                 2020                                     2021                                     2020
                                                                                                                         Weighted-                                Weighted-
                                                            Number of           Number of            Number of             average            Number of             average
Share units (in thousands)                                    Awards              Awards               Awards         exercise price            Awards         exercise price
Outstanding at beginning of year                                2,418               2,040                1,254             € 24.65                2,087             € 24.65
Granted                                                           709                 805                    0                   -                    0                   -
Issued or Exercised                                              (583)               (368)                (256)            € 24.65                 (766)            € 24.65
Forfeited                                                        (110)                (54)                 (14)            € 24.65                  (52)            € 24.65
Expired                                                             0                   0                  (36)            € 24.65                    0                   -
Other Movements                                                   (18)                 (6)                   0             € 24.65                  (14)            € 24.65
Outstanding at end of year                                      2,415               2,418                  948             € 24.65                1,254             € 24.65
  Of which, exercisable                                             0                   0                  739                   -                    0                   -




                                                                                                                                                                       298
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       33 – Employee Benefits




The following table sets out key information regarding awards granted, released and remaining in the year.

                                                                                                2021                                                         2020
                                                                                          Weighted             Weighted                                Weighted
                                                  Weighted            Weighted              average          average fair          Weighted              average
                                                average fair    average share             remaining      value per award     average share             remaining
                                            value per award    price at release/   contractual life in     granted in the   price at release/   contractual life in
                                             granted in year   exercise in year                years                 year   exercise in year                years
DWS Equity Plan                                    € 30.44            € 37.24                       2           € 29.07            € 34.88                       2
DWS SAR Plan                                           n/a            € 39.59                       4               n/a            € 31.95                       5


The fair value of outstanding share-based awards was approximately € 83 million and € 85 million as of December 31, 2021
and 2020, respectively. Of the awards, approximately € 69 million and € 61 million has been recognized in the income
statement up to the period ending 2021 and 2020 respectively, of which € 29 million and € 21 million as of December 31, 2021
and 2020 relate to fully vested awards. Total unrecognized expense related to share-based plans was approximately
€ 14 million and € 25 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, dependent on future share price development.

During 2020, eligible employees were invited to exercise their SAR Awards as part of two distinct Early Exercise Offers. SAR
Awards which were not exercised continue to be subject to the terms and conditions of the DWS SAR Plan Rules, including
forfeiture provisions.

The fair value of the DWS SAR Plan awards have been measured using the generalized Black-Scholes model. The liabilities
incurred are re-measured at the end of each reporting period until settlement. The principal inputs being the market value on
reporting date, discounted for any dividends foregone over the holding periods of the award, and adjustment for expected and
actual levels of vesting which includes estimating the number of eligible employees leaving the Group and number of
employees eligible for early retirement. The inputs used in the measurement of the fair values at grant date and measurement
date of the DWS SAR Plan awards were as follows.

                                                                                                                              Measurement          Measurement
                                                                                                                                      date                 date
                                                                                                                              Dec 31, 2021         Dec 31, 2020
Units (in thousands)                                                                                                                   948                 1,254
Fair value                                                                                                                         € 10.99               € 10.68
Share price                                                                                                                        € 35.48               € 34.80
Exercise price                                                                                                                     € 24.65               € 24.65
Expected volatility (weighted-average)                                                                                               32 %                  33 %
Expected life (weighted-average) in years                                                                                                4                     5
Expected dividends (% of income)                                                                                                     65 %                  65 %


Given the limited trading in the market of implied DWS share price volatility, the expected volatility of the DWS share price
has been based on an evaluation of the historical volatility for a comparable peer group over the preceding 5-year period. The
expected dividend level is linked to the latest DWS Group communication.


Post-employment Benefit Plans
Nature of Plans

The Group sponsors a number of post-employment benefit plans on behalf of its employees, both defined contribution plans
and defined benefit plans. The Group’s plans are accounted for based on the nature and substance of the plan. Generally, for
defined benefit plans the value of a participant’s accrued benefit is based on each employee’s remuneration and length of
service; contributions to defined contribution plans are typically based on a percentage of each employee’s remuneration. The
rest of this note focuses predominantly on the Group’s defined benefit plans.

The Group’s defined benefit plans are primarily described on a geographical basis, reflecting differences in the nature and
risks of benefits, as well as in the respective regulatory environments. In particular, the requirements set by local regulators
can vary significantly and determine the design and financing of the benefit plans to a certain extent. Key information is also
shown based on participant status, which provides a broad indication of the maturity of the Group’s obligations.




                                                                                                                                                            299
Deutsche Bank                                                         Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                    33 – Employee Benefits




                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021
in € m.                                                                             Germany                    UK                  U.S.                Other                Total
Defined benefit obligation related to
  Active plan participants                                                            4,626                  632                  243                  635                6,136
  Participants in deferred status                                                     2,535                3,020                  564                  118                6,237
  Participants in payment status                                                      5,936                1,277                  544                  274                8,031
Total defined benefit obligation                                                     13,097                4,929                1,351                1,027               20,404
Fair value of plan assets                                                            12,642                6,019                1,148                1,079               20,888
Funding ratio (in %)                                                                   97 %                122 %                85 %1                105 %                102 %
1
    US Total defined benefit obligation is inclusive of the unfunded US Medicare Plan (€ 170 million) in addition to defined benefit pension plans. The US defined benefit pension
    funding ratio excluding Medicare is 97 %.


                                                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2020
in € m.                                                                             Germany                    UK                  U.S.                Other                Total
Defined benefit obligation related to
  Active plan participants                                                            4,950                  706                  236                  648                6,540
  Participants in deferred status                                                     2,639                2,876                  561                  111                6,187
  Participants in payment status                                                      5,943                1,335                  530                  272                8,080
Total defined benefit obligation                                                     13,532                4,917                1,327                1,031               20,807
Fair value of plan assets                                                            12,658                5,705                1,107                  987               20,457
Funding ratio (in %)                                                                   94 %                116 %                83 %1                 96 %                 98 %
1
    US Total defined benefit obligation is inclusive of the unfunded US Medicare Plan (€ 168 million) in addition to defined benefit pension plans. The US defined benefit pension
    funding ratio excluding Medicare is 96 %.


The majority of the Group’s defined benefit plan obligations relate to Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Within the other countries, the largest obligation relates to Switzerland. In Germany and some continental European countries,
post-employment benefits are usually agreed on a collective basis with respective employee workers councils, unions or their
equivalent. The Group’s main pension plans are governed by boards of trustees, fiduciaries or their equivalent.

Post-employment benefits can form an important part of an employee’s total remuneration. The Group’s approach is that their
design shall be attractive to employees in the respective market, but sustainable for the Group to provide over the longer term.
At the same time, the Group tries to limit its risks related to provision of such benefits. Consequently, the Group has moved
to offer defined contribution plans in many locations over recent years.

In the past the Group typically offered pension plans based on final pay prior to retirement. These types of benefits still form
a significant part of the pension obligations for participants in deferred and payment status. Currently, in Germany and the
United States, the main defined benefit pension plans for active staff are cash account type plans where the Group credits an
annual amount to individual accounts based on an employee’s current compensation. Dependent on the plan rules, the
accounts increase either at a fixed interest rate or participate in market movements of certain underlying investments to limit
the investment risk for the Group. Sometimes, in particular in Germany, there is a guaranteed benefit amount within the plan
rules, e.g. payment of at least the amounts contributed. Upon retirement, beneficiaries may usually opt for a lump sum, a fixed
number of annual instalments or for conversion of the accumulated account balance into a life annuity. This conversion is
often based on market conditions and mortality assumptions at retirement.

The Group also sponsors retirement and termination indemnity plans in several countries, as well as some post-employment
medical plans for a number of current and retired employees, mainly in the United States. The post-employment medical plans
typically pay fixed percentages of medical expenses of eligible retirees after a set deductible has been met. In the United
States, once a retiree is eligible for Medicare, the Group contributes to a Health Reimbursement Account and the retiree is no
longer eligible for the Group’s medical program. The Group’s total defined benefit obligation for post-employment medical
plans was € 201 million and € 202 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. In combination with
the benefit structure, these plans represent limited risk for the Group, given the nature and size of the post-retirement medical
plan liabilities versus the size of the Group’s balance sheet at year end 2021.

The following amounts of expected benefit payments from the Group’s defined benefit plans include benefits attributable to
employees’ past and estimated future service and include both amounts paid from the Group’s external pension trusts and
paid directly by the Group in respect of unfunded plans.

in € m.                                                                             Germany                    UK                  U.S.                Other                Total
Actual benefit payments 2021                                                             477                  134                   87                   67                  765
Benefits expected to be paid 2022                                                        515                  235                   78                   66                  894
Benefits expected to be paid 2023                                                        523                  133                   79                   64                  799
Benefits expected to be paid 2024                                                        542                  143                   80                   67                  832
Benefits expected to be paid 2025                                                        560                  161                   81                   63                  865
Benefits expected to be paid 2026                                                        577                  165                   83                   63                  888
Benefits expected to be paid 2027 – 2031                                               3,119                  961                  410                  323                4,813
Weighted average duration of defined benefit
obligation (in years)                                                                     14                   20                   11                   12                   15




                                                                                                                                                                           300
Deutsche Bank                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                33 – Employee Benefits




Multi-employer Plans

In Germany, the Group is a member of the BVV Versicherungsverein des Bankgewerbes a.G. (BVV) together with other
financial institutions. The BVV offers retirement benefits to eligible employees in Germany as a complement to post-
employment benefit promises of the Group. Both employers and employees contribute on a regular basis to the BVV. The
BVV provides annuities of a fixed amount to individuals on retirement and increases these fixed amounts if surplus assets
arise within the plan. According to legislation in Germany, the employer is ultimately liable for providing the benefits to its
employees. An increase in benefits may also arise due to additional obligations to retirees for the effects of inflation. BVV is a
multi-employer defined benefit plan. However, in line with industry practice, the Group accounts for it as a defined contribution
plan since insufficient information is available to identify assets and liabilities relating to the Group’s current and former
employees, primarily because the BVV does not fully allocate plan assets to beneficiaries nor to member companies.

Governance and Risk

The Group maintains a Pensions Committee to oversee its pension and related risks on a global basis. This Committee meets
quarterly and reports directly to the Senior Executive Compensation Committee.

Within this context, the Group develops and maintains guidelines for governance and risk management, including funding,
asset allocation and actuarial assumption setting.

During and after acquisitions or changes in the external environment (e.g., legislation, taxation), topics such as the general
plan design or potential plan amendments are considered. Any plan changes follow a process requiring approval by Group
Human Resources and, above a certain threshold, also of the Pensions Committee.

Pension risk management is embedded in the Group’s risk management organization, with strong focus on market risks given
importance of capital market developments (e.g., interest rate, credit spread, price inflation) for the value of plan assets and
liabilities, hence IFRS and regulatory capital. Risk management thereby encompasses regular measurement, monitoring and
reporting of risks via specific metrics, as well as a risk control framework, e.g. via the establishment of risk limits or thresholds
as applicable. Risk management activities also include the consideration, review and measurement of other financial risks,
e.g. risks from demographic and other actuarial assumptions (e.g., longevity risk) but also the assessment of model, valuation
and other non-financial risks.

In the Group’s key pension countries, the Group’s largest post-employment benefit plan risk exposures relate to potential
changes in credit spreads, interest rates, price inflation and longevity, that are partially mitigated through the investment
strategy adopted. To the extent that pension plans are funded, the assets held mitigate some of the liability risks, but introduce
investment risk.

Overall, the Group seeks to minimize the impact of pensions on the Group’s financial position from market movements, subject
to balancing the trade-offs involved in financing post-employment benefits, regulatory capital and constraints from local funding
or accounting requirements.

Funding

The Group maintains various external pension trusts to fund the majority of its defined benefit plan obligations. The Group’s
funding principle is to maintain funding of the defined benefit obligation by plan assets within a range of 90 % to 100 % of the
obligation, subject to meeting any local statutory requirements. The Group has also determined that certain plans should
remain unfunded, although their funding approach is subject to periodic review, e.g. when local regulations or practices
change. Obligations for the Group’s unfunded plans are accrued on the balance sheet.

For many of the externally funded defined benefit plans there are local minimum funding requirements. The Group can decide
on any additional plan contributions, with reference to the Group’s funding principle. There are some locations, e.g. the United
Kingdom, where the trustees and the Group jointly agree contribution levels. In most countries the Group expects to receive
an economic benefit from any plan surpluses of plan assets compared to defined benefit obligations, typically by way of
reduced future contributions. Given the relatively high funding level and the investment strategy adopted in the Group’s key
funded defined benefit plans, any minimum funding requirements that may apply are not expected to place the Group under
any material adverse cash strain in the short term. With reference to the Group’s funding principle, the Group considers not
re-claiming benefits paid from the Group’s assets as an equivalent to making cash contributions into the external pension
trusts during the year.

For post-retirement medical plans, the Group accrues for obligations over the period of employment and pays the benefits
from Group assets when the benefits become due.




                                                                                                                               301
Deutsche Bank                                                        Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                   33 – Employee Benefits




Actuarial Methodology and Assumptions

December 31 is the measurement date for all plans. All plans are valued by independent qualified actuaries using the projected
unit credit method. A Group policy provides guidance to ensure consistency globally on setting actuarial assumptions which
are finally determined by the Group’s Pensions Committee. Senior management of the Group is regularly informed of
movements and changes in key actuarial assumptions.

The key actuarial assumptions applied in determining the defined benefit obligations at December 31 are presented below in
the form of weighted averages.

                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021                                            Dec 31, 2020
                                                   Germany                UK            U.S.1         Other      Germany             UK         U.S.1         Other
Discount rate (in %)                                1.10 %          1.86 %           2.73 %         1.92 %        0.60 %        1.26 %       2.31 %         1.51 %
Rate of price inflation (in %)                      2.19 %          3.73 %           2.30 %         1.88 %        1.29 %        3.22 %       2.10 %         1.54 %
Rate of nominal increase in
future compensation levels (in %)                   2.42 %          4.23 %           2.40 %         2.69 %        1.79 %        3.72 %       2.20 %         2.57 %
Rate of nominal increase for
pensions in payment (in %)                          2.10 %          3.49 %           2.30 %         1.05 %        1.19 %        3.08 %       2.10 %         0.86 %

Assumed life expectancy
at age 65
   For a male aged 65
   at measurement date                                 21.3             23.5            21.9           22.0          21.2          23.5         21.8           22.0
   For a female aged 65
   at measurement date                                 23.5             25.1            23.3           24.0          23.5          25.0         23.2           24.2
   For a male aged 45
   at measurement date                                 22.6             24.6            23.3           23.4          22.5          24.5         23.2           23.3
   For a female aged 45
   at measurement date                                 24.6             26.5            24.7           25.4          24.6          26.4         24.5           25.6


Mortality tables applied                                        SAPS (S3)                                                    SAPS (S3)
                                                                     Light/                                                       Light\
                                                  Modified       Very Light       PRI-2012                       Modified     Very Light   PRI-2012
                                                Richttafeln       with CMI              with       Country     Richttafeln     with CMI          with      Country
                                                 Heubeck              2020        MP-2021          specific     Heubeck            2019    MP-2020         specific
                                                    2018G       projections       projection        tables         2018G     projections   projection       tables
1
    Cash balance interest crediting rate in line with the 30-year US government bond yield.


For the Group’s most significant pension plans in the key countries, the discount rate used at each measurement date is set
based on a high quality corporate bond yield curve, which is derived using a bond universe sourced from reputable third-party
market data providers, and reflects the timing, amount and currency of the future expected benefit payments for the respective
plan. In Q4 2021, a revised discount curve methodology that provides improved data quality for the determination of the
underlying bond universe was approved for use in the UK. The adoption of this methodology resulted in around € 45 million
net actuarial gain that was recognized through Other Comprehensive Income. This resulted in a corresponding increase to
the overall pension surplus and the net defined benefit asset, due to the net presentation of the pension plan assets and the
defined benefit obligation.

The price inflation assumptions in the Eurozone and the United Kingdom are set with reference to market measures of inflation
based on inflation swap rates in those markets at each measurement date. For other countries, the price inflation assumptions
are typically based on long term forecasts by Consensus Economics Inc.

The assumptions for the increases in future compensation levels and for increases to pensions in payment are developed
separately for each plan, where relevant. Each is set based on the price inflation assumption and reflecting the Group’s reward
structure or policies in each market, as well as relevant local statutory and plan-specific requirements.

Among other assumptions, mortality assumptions can be significant in measuring the Group’s obligations under its defined
benefit plans. These assumptions have been set in accordance with current best estimate in the respective countries. Future
potential improvements in longevity have been considered and included where appropriate. Due to the long-term nature of
mortality assumptions and lack of clarity over the longer term impacts of the pandemic on health outcomes, there has been
no specific allowance for the impact of COVID-19 in any region, other than for recent experience which was captured as part
of the annual valuation process.

In the financial year ended December 31, 2020, the Group recognized a € 48 million of past service credit in connection with
the inclusion of a lump-sum payment option to one of the German retirement benefit arrangements primarily in the Private
Bank division. This reduction in defined benefit plan obligations was reported as part of Compensation and benefits in the
Consolidated Statement of Income.



                                                                                                                                                              302
Deutsche Bank                                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                     33 – Employee Benefits




Reconciliation in Movement of Liabilities and Assets – Impact on Financial Statements
                                                                                                                                      2021
in € m.                                                                                    Germany         UK      U.S.    Other      Total
Change in the present value of the defined benefit obligation:
Balance, beginning of year                                                                  13,532       4,917    1,327    1,031    20,807
Defined benefit cost recognized in Profit & Loss
  Current service cost                                                                           177        23      10       40       250
  Interest cost                                                                                   80        63      31       16       190
  Past service cost and gain or loss arising from settlements                                     28       (15)      0       (1)       12
Defined benefit cost recognized in Other Comprehensive Income
  Actuarial gain or loss arising from changes in financial
  assumptions                                                                                    (319)    (220)     (50)     (21)     (610)
  Actuarial gain or loss arising from changes in demographic
                                                                                                    0       (5)       3      (14)      (16)
  assumptions
  Actuarial gain or loss arising from experience                                                  75       (16)     20         1        80
Cash flow and other changes
  Contributions by plan participants                                                             1           0        0       14        15
  Benefits paid                                                                               (477)       (134)     (87)     (67)     (765)
  Payments in respect to settlements                                                             0           0        0        0         0
  Acquisitions/Divestitures                                                                      0           0        0        0         0
  Exchange rate changes                                                                          0         316       97       28       441
  Other                                                                                          0           0        0        0         0
Balance, end of year                                                                        13,097       4,929    1,351    1,027    20,404
  thereof:
  Unfunded                                                                                       0          14      197      90        301
  Funded                                                                                    13,097       4,915    1,154     937     20,103

Change in fair value of plan assets:
Balance, beginning of year                                                                  12,658       5,705    1,107     987     20,457
Defined benefit cost recognized in Profit & Loss
  Interest income                                                                                 76       74       26       14       190
Defined benefit cost recognized in Other Comprehensive Income
  Return from plan assets less interest income                                                   243         5        7      46       301
Cash flow and other changes
  Contributions by plan participants                                                             1           0        0       14        15
  Contributions by the employer                                                                141           0        4       32       177
  Benefits paid1                                                                              (477)       (134)     (75)     (52)     (738)
  Payments in respect to settlements                                                             0           0        0        0         0
  Acquisitions/Divestitures                                                                      0           0        0        0         0
  Exchange rate changes                                                                          0         374       82       39       495
  Other                                                                                          0           0        0        0         0
  Plan administration costs                                                                      0          (5)      (3)      (1)       (9)
Balance, end of year                                                                        12,642       6,019    1,148    1,079    20,888
Funded status, end of year                                                                    (455)      1,090     (203)      52       484

Change in irrecoverable surplus (asset ceiling)
Balance, beginning of year                                                                          0        0        0      (38)      (38)
Interest cost                                                                                       0        0        0        0         0
Changes in irrecoverable surplus                                                                    0        0        0      (48)      (48)
Exchange rate changes                                                                               0        0        0       (4)       (4)
Balance, end of year                                                                                0        0        0      (90)      (90)

Net asset (liability) recognized                                                                 (455)   1,090     (203)     (38)     3942
1
    For funded plans only.
2
    Thereof € 1,207 million recognized in Other assets and € 813 million in Other liabilities.




                                                                                                                                     303
Deutsche Bank                                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                     33 – Employee Benefits




                                                                                                                                                              2020
in € m.                                                                               Germany                    UK                   U.S.         Other      Total
Change in the present value of the defined benefit obligation:
Balance, beginning of year                                                             13,270                 4,687                1,418           1,043    20,418
Defined benefit cost recognized in Profit & Loss
  Current service cost                                                                     200                    28                   12             42       282
  Interest cost                                                                            122                    85                   43             18       268
  Past service cost and gain or loss arising from settlements                              (22)1                  11                    0              0       (11)
Defined benefit cost recognized in Other Comprehensive
Income
  Actuarial gain or loss arising from changes in financial
  assumptions                                                                              536                  600                    75             39     1,250
  Actuarial gain or loss arising from changes in demographic
  assumptions                                                                             110                   (11)                   (9)             2        92
  Actuarial gain or loss arising from experience                                          (73)                  (68)                     3          (14)     (152)
Cash flow and other changes
  Contributions by plan participants                                                         4                    0                     0              15       19
  Benefits paid                                                                          (456)                (160)                  (96)            (80)    (792)
  Payments in respect to settlements                                                         0                    0                     0               0        0
  Acquisitions/Divestitures                                                             (158)2                    0                     0               0    (158)
  Exchange rate changes                                                                      0                (255)                (119)             (36)    (410)
  Other                                                                                    (1)                    0                     0               2        1
Balance, end of year                                                                   13,532                 4,917                1,327           1,031    20,807
  thereof:
  Unfunded                                                                                  0                    15                  195             105       315
  Funded                                                                               13,532                 4,902                1,132             926    20,492

Change in fair value of plan assets:
Balance, beginning of year                                                             11,915                 5,615                1,143             982    19,655
Defined benefit cost recognized in Profit & Loss
  Interest income                                                                          111                  101                    34             17       263
Defined benefit cost recognized in Other Comprehensive
Income
  Return from plan assets less interest income                                             777                  456                    60             42     1,335
Cash flow and other changes
  Contributions by plan participants                                                         4                     0                    0             15        19
  Contributions by the employer                                                            444                     0                   56             28       528
  Benefits paid3                                                                         (456)                (159)                  (84)           (65)     (764)
  Payments in respect to settlements                                                         0                     0                    0              0          0
  Acquisitions/Divestitures                                                             (137)2                     0                    0              0     (137)
  Exchange rate changes                                                                      0                (303)                  (99)           (31)     (433)
  Other                                                                                      0                     0                    0              0          0
  Plan administration costs                                                                  0                   (5)                  (3)            (1)        (9)
Balance, end of year                                                                   12,658                 5,705                1,107            987     20,457
Funded status, end of year                                                               (874)                  788                (220)            (44)     (350)

Change in irrecoverable surplus (asset ceiling)
Balance, beginning of year                                                                    0                    0                     0          (40)      (40)
Interest cost                                                                                 0                    0                     0             0         0
Changes in irrecoverable surplus                                                              0                    0                     0             2         2
Exchange rate changes                                                                         0                    0                     0             0         0
Balance, end of year                                                                          0                    0                     0          (38)      (38)

Net asset (liability) recognized                                                         (874)                  788                 (220)           (82)    (388)4
1
    Contains a past service credit of € 48 million due to the introduction of a capital option for a specific plan sponsored by former Postbank.
2
    Postbank Systems AG.
3
    For funded plans only.
4
    Thereof € 877 million recognized in Other assets and € 1,265 million in Other liabilities.


There are no reimbursement rights for the Group.

Investment Strategy

The Group’s investment objective is to protect the Group from adverse impacts of its defined benefit pension plans on key
financial metrics. The primary focus is to protect the plans’ IFRS funded status in the case of adverse market scenarios. In
2021, there has been a shift in the investment strategy in selected markets to balance competing key financial metrics.
Investment managers manage pension assets in line with investment mandates or guidelines as agreed with the pension
plans’ trustees and investment committees.

For key defined benefit plans for which the Group aims to protect the IFRS funded status, the Group applies a liability driven
investment (LDI) approach. Risks from mismatches between fluctuations in the present value of the defined benefit obligations
and plan assets due to capital market movements are minimized, subject to balancing relevant trade-offs. This is achieved by


                                                                                                                                                             304
Deutsche Bank                                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                      33 – Employee Benefits




allocating plan assets closely to the market risk factor exposures of the pension liability to interest rates, credit spreads and
inflation. Thereby, plan assets broadly reflect the underlying risk profile and currency of the pension obligations.

Where the desired hedging level for market risks cannot be achieved with physical instruments (i.e., corporate and government
bonds), derivatives are employed. Derivative overlays mainly include interest rate, inflation swaps and credit default swaps.
Other instruments are also used, such as interest rate futures and options. In practice, a completely hedged approach is
impractical, for instance because of insufficient market depth for ultra-long-term corporate bonds, as well as liquidity and cost
considerations. Therefore, plan assets contain further return-seeking asset categories such as equity, real estate, high yield
bonds or emerging markets bonds to create long-term value and achieve diversification benefits.

In 2020, the group entered into two buy-in transactions with a third party insurer to de-risk € 1.2 billion of exposure to the UK
defined benefit pension schemes funded from existing assets, with no additional employer contribution required. The
recognition of the insurance policies as qualifying plan assets in Q1 and Q4 negatively impacted Other Comprehensive Income
in the Group’s financial statement by approximately € 115 million and € 60 million, respectively.

Plan asset allocation to key asset classes

The following table shows the asset allocation of the Group’s funded defined benefit plans to key asset classes, i.e. exposures
include physical securities in discretely managed portfolios and underlying asset allocations of any commingled funds used to
invest plan assets.

Asset amounts in the following table include both “quoted” (i.e., Level 1 assets in accordance with IFRS 13 – amounts invested
in markets where the fair value can be determined directly from prices which are quoted in active, liquid markets) and “other”
(i.e., Level 2 and 3 assets in accordance with IFRS 13) assets.

                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021                                                            Dec 31, 2020
in € m.                                    Germany              UK           U.S.         Other           Total     Germany             UK            U.S.         Other          Total
Cash and cash equivalents                       930            321            56             78          1,385           290           504             67             57           918
Equity instruments1                           1,220            348           151            209          1,928           899           609            126             57         1,691
Investment-grade bonds2
  Government                                  2,524         1,918            436            207          5,085        2,829          1,048            422           167          4,466
  Non-government bonds                        5,386         1,894            379            336          7,995        6,144          2,034            387           258          8,823
Non-investment-grade bonds
  Government                                    137              1              1             1            140            99             2              1             18           120
  Non-government bonds                          423            142             33            55            653           236           107             37             28           408
Securitized and other Debt
                                                839            124             79              7         1,049              1          122             73              0           196
Investments
Insurance                                          1        1,256               0            10          1,267              1        1,248               0            13         1,262
Alternatives
  Real estate                                   528               0             0            98            626          443              37              0           79            559
  Commodities                                    25               0             0             5             30           24               0              0            0             24
  Private equity                                  0               0             0             2              2           72               0              0           23             95
  Other3                                         46               0             0            50             96        1,406               0              0          271          1,677
Derivatives (Market Value)
  Interest rate                                518             42              9             2            571            78            (18)           (3)             0            57
  Credit                                        65            (87)            16             1             (5)          115           (107)           15              1            24
  Inflation                                      0            (62)             0            14            (48)            0           (109)            0             11           (98)
  Foreign exchange                              (1)             4              0             4              7            20              3             0              4            27
  Other                                          1            118            (12)            0            107             1            225           (18)             0           208
Total fair value of plan assets             12,642          6,019          1,148         1,079         20,888        12,658          5,705         1,107            987        20,457
1
    Allocation of equity exposure is broadly in line with the typical index in the respective market, e.g. the equity portfolio’s benchmark of the UK retirement benefit plans is the
    MSCI All Countries World Index.
2
    Investment-grade means BBB and above. Average credit rating exposure for the Group’s main plans is around A.
3
    This position contains commingled funds which could not be segregated into the other asset categories.


The following table sets out the Group’s funded defined benefit plan assets only invested in “quoted” assets, i.e. Level 1 assets
in accordance with IFRS 13.




                                                                                                                                                                                 305
Deutsche Bank                                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                      33 – Employee Benefits




                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021                                                              Dec 31, 2020
in € m.                                    Germany              UK           U.S.         Other           Total      Germany            UK            U.S.           Other          Total
Cash and cash equivalents                       756            317            48             34          1,155           226           504             63              26            819
Equity instruments1                             983            348           151             53          1,535           760           609            126              45          1,540
Investment-grade bonds2
  Government                                    902           1,902          431             77          3,312         1,107           989            417              56          2,569
  Non-government bonds                            0               0            0              0              0             0             0              0               0              0
Non-investment-grade bonds
  Government                                       0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              5               5
  Non-government bonds                             0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              0               0
Securitized and other Debt
                                                   0           118                 0           0           118               0            0              0              0               0
Investments
Insurance                                          0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              0               0
Alternatives
  Real estate                                      0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              0               0
  Commodities                                      0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              0               0
  Private equity                                   0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              0               0
  Other                                            0              0                0           0             0               0            0              0              0               0
Derivatives (Market Value)
  Interest rate                                    0              0           (16)            0            (16)              0           1            (15)              0            (14)
  Credit                                           0              1             0             0              1               0        (107)             0               0           (107)
  Inflation                                        0              0             0            14             14               0           0              0              11             11
  Foreign exchange                                 0              2             0             0              2               0           4              0               0              4
  Other                                            1              0             0             0              1               1           0              0               0              1
Total fair value of quoted
plan assets                                   2,642           2,688          614            178          6,122         2,094         2,000            591             143          4,828
1
    Allocation of equity exposure is broadly in line with the typical index in the respective market, e.g. the equity portfolio’s benchmark of the UK retirement benefit plans is the
    MSCI All Countries World Index.
2
    Investment-grade means BBB and above. Average credit rating exposure for the Group’s main plans is around A.


The following tables show the asset allocation of the “quoted” and “other” defined benefit plan assets by key geography in
which they are invested.

                                                                                                                                                                             Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                                                       Other
                                                                         United               United                 Other         developed            Emerging
in € m.                                           Germany              Kingdom                States              Eurozone          countries            markets                    Total
Cash and cash equivalents                                3                  174                  88                 1,039                 45                    37                 1,386
Equity instruments                                      36                   61               1,182                   304                258                    87                 1,928
Government bonds
(investment-grade and above)                           860               1,799                  500                 1,153                222                  551                  5,085
Government bonds
(non-investment-grade)                                    0                    0                     0                  4                     2               134                    140
Non-government bonds
(investment-grade and above)                           500               1,546                2,437                 2,873                539                  100                  7,995
Non-government bonds
(non-investment-grade)                                  46                   61                    92                 438                     9                  7                   653
Securitized and other Debt
Investments                                             23                  97                   86                    31                809                    3                 1,049
Subtotal                                             1,468               3,738                4,385                 5,842              1,884                  919                18,236
   Share (in %)                                        8%                20 %                 24 %                  32 %               10 %                   5%                 100 %
Other asset categories                                                                                                                                                            2,652
Fair value of plan assets                                                                                                                                                        20,888




                                                                                                                                                                                   306
Deutsche Bank                                    Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                               33 – Employee Benefits




                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                              Other
                                                  United           United        Other    developed      Emerging
in € m.                          Germany        Kingdom            States     Eurozone     countries      markets           Total
Cash and cash equivalents             (7)           396              170          308           20            31             918
Equity instruments                   209             70              703          270          336           103           1,691
Government bonds
(investment-grade and above)       1,018            979              470        1,150          292           557           4,466
Government bonds
(non-investment-grade)                 2              0                   0         7            11          100             120
Non-government bonds
(investment-grade and above)         639          1,601            2,685        3,265          554            79           8,823
Non-government bonds
(non-investment-grade)                 1             52               46          292             8            8             407
Securitized and other Debt
Investments                            1             99               82           12            0             2            196
Subtotal                           1,863          3,197            4,156        5,304        1,221           880         16,621
   Share (in %)                    11 %           19 %             25 %         32 %           7%            5%          100 %
Other asset categories                                                                                                    3,836
Fair value of plan assets                                                                                                20,457



Plan assets include derivative transactions with Group entities with an overall positive market value of around € 553 million at
December 31, 2021 and € 210 million December 31, 2020, respectively. There is neither a material amount of securities
issued by the Group nor other claims on Group assets included in the fair value of plan assets. The plan assets do not include
any real estate which is used by the Group.

After the receipt of the German supreme fiscal court’s (Bundesfinanzhof) favorable decision for tax year 2010 in March 2021,
the German tax authorities also concluded on the tax treatment of our pension plan assets as it relates to tax years 2011-2013
consistent with the court’s favorable decision for the year 2010.

Key Risk Sensitivities
The Group’s defined benefit obligations are sensitive to changes in capital market conditions and actuarial assumptions.
Sensitivities to capital market movements and key assumption changes are presented in the following table. Each market risk
factor or assumption is changed in isolation. Sensitivities of the defined benefit obligations are approximated using geometric
extrapolation methods based on plan durations for the respective assumption. Duration is a risk measure that indicates the
broad sensitivity of the obligations to a change in an underlying assumption and provides a reasonable approximation for small
to moderate changes in those assumptions.

For example, the interest rate duration is derived from the change in the defined benefit obligation to a change in the interest
rate based on information provided by the local actuaries of the respective plans. The resulting duration is used to estimate
the remeasurement liability loss or gain from changes in the interest rate. For other assumptions, a similar approach is used
to derive the respective sensitivity results.

For defined benefit pension plans, changes in capital market conditions will impact the plan obligations via actuarial
assumptions (e.g. via the discount rate and price inflation rate) as well as the plan assets’ fair value. Where the Group applies
a LDI approach or has insured part of the obligations as in the UK, the Group’s overall risk exposure to such changes is
reduced. To help readers gain a better understanding of the Group’s risk exposures to key capital market movements, the net
impact of the change in the defined benefit obligations and plan assets due to a change of the related market risk factor or
underlying actuarial assumption is shown. Where changes in actuarial assumptions do not affect plan assets, only the impact
on the defined benefit obligations is reported.

Asset-related sensitivities are derived for the Group’s major plans by using risk sensitivity factors determined by the Group’s
Market Risk Management function. These sensitivities are calculated based on information provided by the plans’ investment
managers and extrapolated linearly to reflect the approximate change of the plan assets’ market value in case of a change in
the underlying risk factor.




                                                                                                                           307
Deutsche Bank                                                        Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                   33 – Employee Benefits




The sensitivities illustrate plausible variations over time in capital market movements and key actuarial assumptions. The
Group is not in a position to provide a view on the likelihood of these capital market or assumption changes. While these
sensitivities illustrate the overall impact on the funded status of the changes shown, the significance of the impact and the
range of reasonable possible alternative assumptions may differ between the different plans that comprise the aggregated
results. Even though plan assets and plan obligations are sensitive to similar risk factors, actual changes in plan assets and
obligations may not fully offset each other due to imperfect correlations between market risk factors and actuarial assumptions.
Caution should be used when extrapolating these sensitivities due to non-linear effects that changes in capital market
conditions and key actuarial assumptions may have on the overall funded status. Any management actions that may be taken
to mitigate the inherent risks in the post-employment defined benefit plans are not reflected in these sensitivities.

                                                                                                           Dec 31, 2021                                             Dec 31, 2020
in € m.                                                          Germany              UK           U.S.          Other     Germany             UK           U.S.            Other
Interest rate (–50 bp):
   (Increase) in DBO                                                 (915)          (520)          (40)            (60)        (970)         (520)           (45)            (60)
   Expected increase in plan assets1                                  595            350            35              20          895           400             35              25
   Expected net impact on funded status (de-)
   increase                                                          (320)          (170)            (5)           (40)         (75)         (120)           (10)            (35)

Interest rate (+50 bp):
   Decrease in DBO                                                    855            470            40              55          900           470             40              55
   Expected (decrease) in plan assets1                               (595)          (350)          (35)            (20)        (895)         (400)           (35)            (25)
   Expected net impact on funded status (de-)
   increase                                                           260           120               5             35            5            70              5              30

Credit spread (–50 bp):
  (Increase) in DBO                                                  (915)          (520)          (75)            (60)        (970)         (520)           (75)            (65)
  Expected increase in plan assets1                                   595            125            15              10          760           120             15              10
  Expected net impact on funded status (de-)
  increase                                                           (320)          (395)          (60)            (50)        (210)         (400)           (60)            (55)

Credit spread (+50 bp):
  Decrease in DBO                                                     855            470            70              55          900           470             70              60
  Expected (decrease) in plan assets1                                (595)          (125)          (15)            (10)        (760)         (120)           (15)            (10)
  Expected net impact on funded status (de-)
  increase                                                            260           345             55              45         140            350             55              50

Rate of price inflation (–50 bp):2
  Decrease in DBO                                                     370            365              0             20          320           390              0              20
  Expected (decrease) in plan assets1                                (290)          (270)             0            (10)        (235)         (255)             0             (10)
  Expected net impact on funded status (de-)
  increase                                                              80            95              0             10           85           135              0              10

Rate of price inflation (+50 bp):2
  (Increase) in DBO                                                  (385)          (365)             0            (25)        (330)         (425)             0             (20)
  Expected increase in plan assets1                                   290            270              0             10          235           255              0              10
  Expected net impact on funded status (de-)
  increase                                                             (95)          (95)             0            (15)         (95)         (170)             0             (10)

Rate of real increase in future compensation
levels (–50 bp):
  Decrease in DBO, net impact on funded status                          55             5              0             15           60            10              0              15

Rate of real increase in future compensation
levels (+50 bp):
  (Increase) in DBO, net impact on funded status                       (55)           (5)             0            (15)         (60)          (10)             0             (15)

Longevity improvements by 10 %:3
  (Increase) in DBO, net impact on funded status                     (335)          (160)4         (30)            (15)        (325)         (160)4          (30)            (15)
1
    Expected changes in the fair value of plan assets contain the simulated impact from the biggest plans in Germany, the UK, the U.S., Channel Islands, Switzerland and
    Belgium which cover over 99 % of the total fair value of plan assets. The fair value of plan assets for other plans is assumed to be unchanged for this presentation.
2
    Incorporates sensitivity to changes in pension benefits to the extent linked to the price inflation assumption.
3
    Estimated to be equivalent to an increase of around 1 year in overall life expectancy.
4
    Due to buy-in transaction the net impact on funded status reduces by € 45 million due to expected gains within the plan assets.




                                                                                                                                                                            308
Deutsche Bank                                                      Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                 33 – Employee Benefits




Expected cash flows

The following table shows expected cash flows for post-employment benefits in 2022, including contributions to the Group’s
external pension trusts in respect of funded plans, direct payment to beneficiaries in respect of unfunded plans, as well as
contributions to defined contribution plans.

                                                                                                                                                                       2022
in € m.                                                                                                                                                                Total
Expected contributions to
  Defined benefit plan assets                                                                                                                                          220
  BVV                                                                                                                                                                   60
  Other defined contribution plans                                                                                                                                     245
Expected benefit payments for unfunded defined benefit plans                                                                                                            25
Expected total cash flow related to post-employment benefits                                                                                                           550


Expense of employee benefits
The following table presents a breakdown of specific expenses according to the requirements of IAS 19 and IFRS 2.

in € m.                                                                                                                       2021                2020                 2019
Expenses for defined benefit plans:
  Service cost1                                                                                                                234                 246                 272
  Net interest cost (income)                                                                                                     0                   5                   2
Total expenses defined benefit plans                                                                                           234                 251                 274
Expenses for defined contribution plans:
  BVV                                                                                                                           58                  60                  63
  Other defined contribution plans                                                                                             244                 243                 244
Total expenses for defined contribution plans                                                                                  302                 303                 307
Total expenses for post-employment benefit plans                                                                               536                 554                 581
Employer contributions to state-mandated pension plans
  Pensions related payments social security in Germany                                                                         221                 233                 231
  Contributions to pension fund for Postbank´s postal civil servants                                                            66                  79                  85
  Further pension related state-mandated benefit plans                                                                         217                 245                 249
Total employer contributions to state-mandated benefit plans                                                                   504                 557                 565
Expenses for share-based payments:
  Expenses for share-based payments, equity settled2                                                                           455                 318                 549
  Expenses for share-based payments, cash settled2                                                                              35                  49                  39
Expenses for cash retention plans2                                                                                             398                 329                 516
Expenses for severance payments3                                                                                               184                 184                  92
1
    Severance related items under Service Costs are reclassified to Expenses for Severance payments.
2
    Including expenses for new hire awards and the acceleration of expenses not yet amortized due to the discontinuation of employment including those amounts which are
    recognized as part of the Group’s restructuring expenses.
3
    Excluding the acceleration of expenses for deferred compensation awards not yet amortized. Severance related items under Service Costs were reclassified to Expense for
    Severance payments.




                                                                                                                                                                      309
Deutsche Bank                                                        Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                   34 – Income Taxes




34 – Income Taxes
in € m.                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                 2019
Current tax expense (benefit):
  Tax expense (benefit) for current year                                                                                          847                  739                  757
  Adjustments for prior years                                                                                                      14                  (46)                   5
Total current tax expense (benefit)                                                                                               861                  693                  762
Deferred tax expense (benefit):
  Origination and reversal of temporary differences, unused tax losses and tax credits                                             65                 (218)                 (71)
  Effect of changes in tax law and/or tax rate                                                                                    (26)                 (11)                  (9)
  Adjustments for prior years                                                                                                     (20)                 (67)               1,948
Total deferred tax expense (benefit)                                                                                               19                 (296)               1,868
Total income tax expense (benefit)                                                                                                880                  397                2,630


Total deferred tax expense includes benefits from previously unrecognized tax losses (tax credits/deductible temporary
differences) and the reversal of previous write-downs of deferred tax assets and expenses arising from write-downs of deferred
tax assets, which decreased the deferred tax expense by € 242 million in 2021, decreased the deferred tax benefit by
€ 96 million in 2020, and increased the deferred tax expense by € 2,785 million in 2019.

Difference between applying German statutory (domestic) income tax rate and actual income tax expense/(benefit)
in € m.                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                 2019
Expected tax expense (benefit) at domestic income tax rate of 31.3 % (31.3 % for 2020 and
31.3 % for 2019)                                                                                                                1,061                  319                 (825)
Foreign rate differential                                                                                                         (92)                 (38)                 170
Tax-exempt gains on securities and other income                                                                                  (183)                (181)                (191)
Loss (income) on equity method investments                                                                                        (11)                 (18)                 (19)
Nondeductible expenses                                                                                                            287                  293                  326
Impairments of goodwill                                                                                                             1                    0                  269
Changes in recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets1                                                                   (227)                  96                2,785
Effect of changes in tax law and/or tax rate                                                                                      (26)                 (11)                  (9)
Effect related to share-based payments                                                                                              1                  (29)                  54
Other1                                                                                                                             69                  (34)                  70
Actual income tax expense (benefit)                                                                                               880                  397                2,630
1
    Current and deferred tax expense/(benefit) relating to prior years are mainly reflected in the line items “Changes in recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets” and
    “Other”.


The Group is under continuous examinations by tax authorities in various jurisdictions. “Other” in the preceding table includes
the effects of these examinations by the tax authorities.

The domestic income tax rate, including corporate tax, solidarity surcharge, and trade tax, used for calculating deferred tax
assets and liabilities was 31.3 % for 2021, 2020 and 2019.

Income taxes credited or charged to equity (other comprehensive income/additional paid in capital)
in € m.                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                 2019
Actuarial gains (losses) related to defined benefit plans                                                                         (207)                  76                 402
Net fair value gains (losses) attributable to credit risk related to financial
                                                                                                                                     5                    6                    1
liabilities designated as at fair value through profit or loss
Financial assets mandatory at fair value through other comprehensive income:
   Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period                                                                        109                 (204)                  (42)
   Realized net gains (losses) arising during the period (reclassified to profit or loss)                                          68                   84                    71
Derivatives hedging variability of cash flows:
   Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period                                                                          (2)                   4                    1
   Net gains (losses) reclassified to profit or loss                                                                                15                   (1)                   1
Other equity movement:
   Unrealized net gains (losses) arising during the period                                                                          88                  (19)                162
   Net gains (losses) reclassified to profit or loss                                                                                 7                   14                   0
Income taxes credited (charged) to other comprehensive income                                                                       83                  (40)                596
Other income taxes credited (charged) to equity                                                                                     45                   11                 (11)




                                                                                                                                                                           310
Deutsche Bank                                                        Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                   34 – Income Taxes




Major components of the Group’s gross deferred tax assets and liabilities
in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020
Deferred tax assets:
  Unused tax losses                                                                                                                            1,653           1,476
  Unused tax credits                                                                                                                               2               0
  Deductible temporary differences:
    Trading activities, including derivatives                                                                                                  2,105           2,994
    Employee benefits, including equity settled share based payments                                                                           2,533           2,457
    Accrued interest expense                                                                                                                   1,428           1,122
    Loans and borrowings, including allowance for loans                                                                                          892           1,069
    Leases                                                                                                                                       857             806
    Intangible Assets                                                                                                                             52             214
    Fair value OCI (IFRS 9)                                                                                                                       53               1
    Other assets                                                                                                                                 515             560
    Other provisions                                                                                                                             110             122
    Other liabilities                                                                                                                             10               4
Total deferred tax assets pre offsetting                                                                                                      10,210          10,825
Deferred tax liabilities:
  Taxable temporary differences:
    Trading activities, including derivatives                                                                                                  1,958           2,752
    Employee benefits, including equity settled share based payments                                                                             296             183
    Loans and borrowings, including allowance for loans                                                                                          538             501
    Leases                                                                                                                                       774             712
    Intangible Assets                                                                                                                            501             560
    Fair value OCI (IFRS 9)                                                                                                                       76             144
    Other assets                                                                                                                                 214             350
    Other provisions                                                                                                                              82              79
    Other liabilities                                                                                                                             54              47
Total deferred tax liabilities pre offsetting                                                                                                  4,493           5,328


Deferred tax assets and liabilities, after offsetting
in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020
Presented as deferred tax assets                                                                                                               6,218           6,058
Presented as deferred tax liabilities                                                                                                            501             561
Net deferred tax assets                                                                                                                        5,717           5,497


The change in the balance of deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities might not equal the deferred tax expense/(benefit).
In general, this is due to (1) deferred taxes that are booked directly to equity, (2) the effects of exchange rate changes on tax
assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than euro, (3) the acquisition and disposal of entities as part of ordinary
activities and (4) the reclassification of deferred tax assets and liabilities which are presented on the face of the balance sheet
as components of other assets and liabilities.

Items for which no deferred tax assets were recognized
in € m.                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021¹   Dec 31, 2020¹
Deductible temporary differences                                                                                                                (988)         (2,204)
  Not expiring                                                                                                                               (10,331)         (9,982)
  Expiring in subsequent period                                                                                                                    0            (138)
  Expiring after subsequent period                                                                                                            (5,811)         (4,702)
Unused tax losses                                                                                                                            (16,142)        (14,822)
  Expiring after subsequent period                                                                                                               (20)            (56)
Unused tax credits                                                                                                                               (21)            (58)
1
    Amounts in the table refer to deductible temporary differences, unused tax losses and tax credits for federal income tax purposes.


Deferred tax assets were not recognized on these items because it is not probable that future taxable profit will be availab le
against which the unused tax losses, unused tax credits and deductible temporary differences can be utilized.

As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Group recognized deferred tax assets of € 5.4 billion and € 5.1 billion,
respectively, that exceeded deferred tax liabilities in entities which have suffered a loss in either the current or preceding
period. This is based on management’s assessment that it is probable that the respective entities will have taxable profits
against which the unused tax losses, unused tax credits and deductible temporary differences can be utilized. Generally, in
determining the amounts of deferred tax assets to be recognized, management uses historical profitability information and, if
relevant, forecasted operating results, based upon approved business plans, including a review of the eligible carry-forward
periods, tax planning opportunities and other relevant considerations.

As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Group had temporary differences associated with the Group’s parent
company’s investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates and interests in joint ventures of € 242 million and
€ 254 million respectively (prior year's comparative aligned to presentation in the current year), in respect of which no deferred
tax liabilities were recognized.



                                                                                                                                                                311
Deutsche Bank                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                35 – Derivatives




35 – Derivatives
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities
Derivative contracts used by the Group include swaps, futures, forwards, options and other similar types of contracts. In the
normal course of business, the Group enters into a variety of derivative transactions for sales, market-making and risk
management purposes. The Group’s objectives in using derivative instruments are to meet customers’ risk management
needs and to manage the Group’s exposure to risks.

In accordance with the Group’s accounting policy relating to derivatives and hedge accounting as described in Note 1
“Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates”, all derivatives are carried at fair value in the balance sheet
regardless of whether they are held for trading or non-trading purposes.


Derivatives held for sales and market-making purposes
Sales and market-making

The majority of the Group’s derivatives transactions relate to sales and market-making activities. Sales activities include the
structuring and marketing of derivative products to customers to enable them to take, transfer, modify or reduce current or
expected risks. Market-making involves quoting bid and offer prices to other market participants, enabling revenue to be
generated based on spreads and volume.

Risk management

The Group uses derivatives in order to reduce its exposure to market risks as part of its asset and liability management. This
is achieved by entering into derivatives that hedge specific portfolios of fixed rate financial instruments and forecast
transactions as well as strategic hedging against overall balance sheet exposures. The Group actively manages interest rate
risk through, among other things, the use of derivative contracts. Utilization of derivative financial instruments is modified from
time to time within prescribed limits in response to changing market conditions, as well as to changes in the characteristics
and mix of the related assets and liabilities.


Derivatives qualifying for hedge accounting
The Group applies hedge accounting if derivatives meet the specific criteria described in Note 1 “Significant Accounting
Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates”.

In fair value hedge relationship, the Group uses primarily interest rate swaps and options, in order to protect itself agains t
movements in the fair value of fixed-rate financial instruments due to movements in market interest rates. In a cash flow hedge
relationship, the Group uses interest rate swaps in order to protect itself against exposure to variability in interest rates. The
Group enters into foreign exchange forwards and swaps for hedges of translation adjustments resulting from translating the
financial statements of net investments in foreign operations into the reporting currency of the parent at period end spot rates.

Interest rate risk

The Group uses interest rate swaps and options to manage its exposure to interest rate risk by modifying the re-pricing
characteristics of existing and/or forecasted assets and liabilities, including funding and investment activities. The interest rate
swaps and options are designated in either a fair value hedge or a cash flow hedge. For fair value hedges, the Group uses
interest rate swaps and options contracts to manage the fair value movements of fixed rate financial instruments due to
changes in benchmark interest. For cash flow hedges, we use interest rate swaps to manage the exposure to cash flow
variability of our variable rate instruments as a result of changes in benchmark interest rates.

The Group manages its interest rate risk exposure on a portfolio basis with frequent changes in the portfolio due to the
origination of new loans and bonds, repayments of existing loans and bonds, issuance of new funding liabilities and repayment
of existing funding liabilities. Accordingly, a dynamic hedging accounting approach is adopted for the portfolio, in which
individual hedge relationships are designated and de-designated on a more frequent basis (e.g. on a monthly basis).




                                                                                                                              312
Deutsche Bank                                         Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                    35 – Derivatives




The Group assesses and measures hedge effectiveness of a hedging relationship based on the change in the fair value or
cash flows of the derivative hedging instrument relative to the change in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged item
attributable to the hedged risk. Potential sources of ineffectiveness can be attributed to differences between hedging
instruments and hedged items:

– Mismatches in the terms of hedged items and hedging instruments, for example the frequency and timing of when interest
  rates are reset, frequency of payment and callable features.
– Difference in the discounting rate applied to the hedged item and the hedging instrument, taking into consideration
  differences in the reset frequency of the hedged item and hedging instrument.
– Derivatives used as hedging instrument with a non-zero fair value at inception date of the hedging relationship, resulting in
  mismatch in terms with the hedged item.

Foreign exchange risk

The Group manages its foreign currency risk (including U.S. dollar and British pound) from investments in foreign operation
through net investment hedges using a combination of foreign exchange forwards and swaps as hedging instruments.

As the investments in foreign operations are only hedged to the extent of the notional amount of the hedging derivative
instrument the Group generally does not expect to incur significant ineffectiveness on hedges of net investments in foreign
operations. Potential sources of ineffectiveness are limited to situations where derivatives with a non-zero fair value at
inception date of the hedging relationship are used as hedging instrument, resulting in mismatch in terms with the hedged
item.


Hedge Accounting and Interest Rate Benchmarks
The table below shows the Group’s hedge accounting relationships impacted by the IASB Benchmark Reform amendments,
the significant interest rate benchmarks the Group is exposed to which are subject to expected future reform, and the nominal
amounts of the derivative hedging instruments as at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. As at December 31, 2021
there were no hedge relationships with hedging instruments, hedged items or the hedged risk being an IBOR benchmark
which ceased to be quoted in early 2022. The derivative hedging instruments provide a close approximation to the extent of
the risk exposure the Group manages through hedge accounting relationships.

                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021      Dec 31, 2020
in € m.                                                                                                                Notional          Notional
Fair value hedge
CHF LIBOR                                                                                                                   0               493
GBP LIBOR                                                                                                                   0             2,073
JPY LIBOR                                                                                                                   0             1,383
USD LIBOR                                                                                                              20,298            20,877


Fair value hedge accounting
Derivatives held as fair value hedges
                                                                                                                                              2020
                                                      Dec 31, 2021               2021                               Dec 31, 2020
                                                                             Fair Value                                                Fair Value
                                                                         changes used                                              changes used
                                                          Nominal             for hedge                                  Nominal        for hedge
in € m.                       Assets    Liabilities       amount          effectiveness   Assets   Liabilities           amount     effectiveness
Derivatives held as fair
value hedges                  4,591        1,928         156,553               (1,424)    7,015       2,835             143,047              757

                                                                                                                                              2020
                                                                                                                          2021
                                                                                                                          Hedge             Hedge
in € m.                                                                                                          ineffectiveness   ineffectiveness
Result of fair value hedges                                                                                                448                 14




                                                                                                                                            313
Deutsche Bank                                                      Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                 35 – Derivatives




Financial instruments designated as fair value hedges
                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2021              2021
                                                                                                                                                                        Fair Value
                                                                                                                                     Accumulated amount of                changes
                                                         Carrying amount of Financial             Accumulated amount of                     fair value hedge                  used
                                                       instruments designated as fair                    fair value hedge          adjustments - Terminated              for hedge
                                                                       value hedges                   adjustments - Total                hedge relationships         effectiveness
in € m.                                                       Assets       Liabilities           Assets        Liabilities          Assets             Liabilities
Financial assets at fair value through
other comprehensive income                                   12,397               0               (221)               0                      4                0              (724)
Bonds at amortized cost                                         582               0                  5                0                      2                0               (12)
Long-term debt                                                    0          62,294                  0            1,595                      0              302             2,329
Deposits                                                          0          57,893                  0             (646)                     0                0             1,357
Loans at amortized cost                                      16,949               0               (751)               0                      0                0            (1,078)



                                                                                                                                                   Dec 31, 2020              2020
                                                                                                                                                                        Fair Value
                                                                                                                                     Accumulated amount of                changes
                                                         Carrying amount of Financial             Accumulated amount of                     fair value hedge                  used
                                                       instruments designated as fair                    fair value hedge          adjustments - Terminated              for hedge
                                                                       value hedges                   adjustments - Total                hedge relationships         effectiveness
in € m.                                                       Assets       Liabilities           Assets        Liabilities          Assets             Liabilities
Financial assets at fair value through
other comprehensive income                                   25,568               0                100                0                      2                0                12
Bonds at amortized cost                                         831               0                 22                0                      4                0                63
Long-term debt                                                    0          57,883                  0            4,196                      0              629            (1,132)
Deposits                                                          0          54,730                  0              265                      0               21                (4)
Loans at amortized cost                                      16,354               0                303                0                      0                0               318


Cash flow hedge accounting
Derivatives held as cash flow hedges
                                                                  Dec 31, 2021                2021                                                Dec 31, 2020               2020
                                                                                          Fair Value                                                                     Fair Value
                                                                                      changes used                                                                   changes used
                                                                       Nominal             for hedge                                                   Nominal            for hedge
in € m.                              Assets         Liabilities        amount          effectiveness           Assets          Liabilities             amount         effectiveness
Derivatives held as
cash flow hedges                        49                 43            7,451                  (75)              79                    0               6,171                  (14)



Cash flow hedge balances
in € m.                                                                                                                 Dec 31, 2021             Dec 31, 2020        Dec 31, 2019
Reported in Equity1                                                                                                             (42)                      11                    21
  thereof relates to terminated programs                                                                                          0                        0                     0
Gains (losses) posted to equity for the year ended                                                                                1                      (14)                   (2)
Gains (losses) removed from equity for the year ended                                                                           (54)                       4                    (2)
  thereof relates to terminated programs                                                                                          0                        0                     0
Changes of hedged item's value used for hedge effectiveness                                                                      66                       (7)                    0
Ineffectiveness recorded within P&L                                                                                              25                      (12)                    0
1
    Reported in equity refers to accumulated other comprehensive income as presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.


In accordance with IAS 39.96 the gains and losses posted to equity in a cash flow hedge relationship is the lesser of cumulative
gain or loss on the hedging instrument from the inception of the hedge and the cumulative change in fair value of the expected
future cash flows on the hedged item from inception of the hedge. As a result, changes of the hedged item’s value used for
hedge effectiveness are not fully recorded in equity if it exceeds the hedging instrument’s fair value changes used for hedge
effectiveness. Consequently, hedge ineffectiveness recorded within P&L does not always reconcile to the difference between
the changes of the hedged item’s value used for hedge effectiveness and the hedging instrument’s fair value changes used
for hedge effectiveness.

As of December 31, 2021 the longest term cash flow hedge matures in 2025.

The financial instruments designated as cash flow hedges are recognized as Loans at amortized cost in the Group’s Consolidated
Balance Sheet.




                                                                                                                                                                             314
Deutsche Bank                                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                35 – Derivatives




Net investment hedge accounting
Derivatives held as net investment hedges

                                                                  Dec 31, 2021               2021                                             Dec 31, 2020            2020
                                                                                         Fair Value                                                              Fair Value
                                                                                     changes used                                                            changes used
                                                                       Nominal            for hedge                                               Nominal         for hedge
in € m.                              Assets         Liabilities        amount         effectiveness           Assets          Liabilities         amount      effectiveness
Derivatives held as net
investment hedges                      227             1,093           39,087              (1,707)            1,617                408             40,277            1,933



                                                                                                                              2021                                    2020
                                                                                                    Fair value                                 Fair value
                                                                                                     changes                                    changes
                                                                                                 recognised in              Hedge           recognised in             Hedge
in € m.                                                                                               Equity1      ineffectiveness               Equity1     ineffectiveness
Result of net investment hedges                                                                         1,892                 (179)              (1,415)              (186)
1
    Reported in equity refers to accumulated other comprehensive income as presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.


Profile of derivatives held as net investment hedges

in € m.                                                                                           Within 1 year           1–3 years            3–5 years       Over 5 years
As of December 31, 2021
  Nominal amount Foreign exchange forwards                                                             38,965                  103                    16                  3
  Nominal amount Foreign exchange swaps                                                                     0                    0                     0                  0
Total                                                                                                  38,965                  103                    16                  3
As of December 31, 2020
  Nominal amount Foreign exchange forwards                                                             40,217                   60                     0                  0
  Nominal amount Foreign exchange swaps                                                                     0                    0                     0                  0
Total                                                                                                  40,217                   60                     0                  0


The Group uses a foreign exchange forward strategy. As indicated in the above table, the vast majority of forward contracts mature
within the year. The Group did not calculate an average foreign currency rate because the amount of contracts that mature after 1
year are not material.




                                                                                                                                                                      315
Deutsche Bank                                                        Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                   36 – Related Party Transactions




36 – Related Party Transactions
Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability to directly or indirectly control the other party or exerci se
significant influence over the other party in making financial or operational decisions. The Group’s related parties include:

– key management personnel including close family members and entities which are controlled, significantly influenced by,
  or for which significant voting power is held by key management personnel or their close family members,
– subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates and their respective subsidiaries, and
– post-employment benefit plans for the benefit of Deutsche Bank employees.


Transactions with Key Management Personnel
Key management personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the
activities of Deutsche Bank, directly or indirectly. The Group considers the members of the Management Board and of the
Supervisory Board of the parent company to constitute key management personnel for purposes of IAS 24.

Compensation expense of key management personnel
in € m.                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                 2019
Short-term employee benefits                                                                                                        36                   30                   32
Post-employment benefits                                                                                                             7                    7                    6
Other long-term benefits                                                                                                            10                    2                    6
Termination benefits                                                                                                                 6                    0                   34
Share-based payment                                                                                                                 15                    8                   21
Total                                                                                                                               74                   47                   99



The above table does not contain compensation that employee representatives and former board members on the Supervisory
Board have received. The aggregated compensation paid to such members for their services as employees of Deutsche Bank
or status as former employees (retirement, pension and deferred compensation) amounted to € 1 million as of
December 31, 2021, € 1 million as of December 31, 2020 and € 1 million as of December 31, 2019.

Among the Group’s transactions with key management personnel as of December 31, 2021 were loans and commitments of
€ 8 million and deposits of € 13 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Group’s transactions with key management personnel
were loans and commitments of € 8 million and deposits of € 21 million.

In addition, the Group provides banking services, such as payment and account services as well as investment advice, to key
management personnel.


Transactions with Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates
Transactions between Deutsche Bank AG and its subsidiaries meet the definition of related party transactions. If these
transactions are eliminated on consolidation, they are not disclosed as related party transactions. Transactions between the
Group and its associated companies and joint ventures and their respective subsidiaries also qualify as related party
transactions.

Transactions for subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are presented combined in below table as these are not material
individually.

Loans
in € m.                                                                                                                                                2021                 2020
Loans outstanding, beginning of year                                                                                                                   214                  228
Net movement in loans during the period                                                                                                                159                  (19)
Changes in the group of consolidated companies                                                                                                           0                    0
Exchange rate changes/other                                                                                                                           (193)                   5
Loans outstanding, end of year1                                                                                                                        181                  214
Other credit risk related transactions:
Allowance for loan losses                                                                                                                                 0                    0
Provision for loan losses                                                                                                                                 0                    0
Guarantees and commitments                                                                                                                               28                   42
1
    Loans past due were € 0 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 0 million as of December 31, 2020. For the total loans the Group held collateral of € 0 million and € 5 million
    as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                           316
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       36 – Related Party Transactions




Deposits
in € m.                                                                                                  2021          2020
Deposits outstanding, beginning of year                                                                   49             58
Net movement in deposits during the period                                                                14             (8)
Changes in the group of consolidated companies                                                             0              0
Exchange rate changes/other                                                                                0             (0)
Deposits outstanding, end of year                                                                         63             49




Other Transactions
Trading assets and positive market values from derivative financial transactions with associated companies amounted to
€ 2 million as of December 31, 2021 and € 1 million as of December 31, 2020. Trading liabilities and negative market values
from derivative financial transactions with associated companies amounted to € 0 million as of December 31, 2021 and
€ 0 million as of December 31, 2020.

Other assets related to transactions with associated companies amounted to € 42 million as of December 31, 2021, and
€ 55 million as of December 31, 2020. Other liabilities related to transactions with associated companies were € 1 million as
of December 31, 2021, and € 2 million as of December 31, 2020.


Transactions with Pension Plans
Under IFRS, post-employment benefit plans are considered related parties. The Group has business relationships with a
number of its pension plans pursuant to which it provides financial services to these plans, including investment management
services. The Group’s pension funds may hold or trade Deutsche Bank shares or securities.

Transactions with related party pension plans
in € m.                                                                                                  2021          2020
Equity shares issued by the Group held in plan assets                                                      23             1
Other assets                                                                                               17            24
Fees paid from plan assets to asset managers of the Group                                                  22            24
Market value of derivatives with a counterparty of the Group                                              765           306
Notional amount of derivatives with a counterparty of the Group                                        12,309        14,623




                                                                                                                       317
Deutsche Bank                                              Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                         37 – Information on Subsidiaries




37 – Information on Subsidiaries
Composition of the Group
Deutsche Bank AG is the direct or indirect holding company for the Group’s subsidiaries.

The Group consists of 563 (2020: 628 ) consolidated entities, thereof 225 (2020: 242) consolidated structured entities. 376
(2020: 420) of the entities controlled by the Group are directly or indirectly held by the Group at 100 % of the ownership
interests (share of capital). Third parties also hold ownership interests in 187 (2020: 208) of the consolidated entities (no n-
controlling interests). As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, one subsidiary has material non-controlling interests. Non-
controlling interests for all other subsidiaries are neither individually nor cumulatively material to the Group.


Subsidiaries with material non-controlling interests
                                                                                                                      Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
DWS Group GmbH & Co. KGaA
Proportion of ownership interests and voting rights held by non-controlling interests                                    20.51 %        20.51 %
Place of business                                                                                                         Global         Global



in € m                                                                                                                Dec 31, 2021   Dec 31, 2020
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests                                                                          161            117
Accumulated non-controlling interests of the subsidiary                                                                     1,545          1,412
Dividends paid to non-controlling interests                                                                                    74             69
Summarized financial information:
  Total assets                                                                                                            11,611         10,448
  Total liabilities                                                                                                        4,166          3,685
  Total net revenues                                                                                                       2,720          2,237
  Net income (loss)                                                                                                          782            558
  Total comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                                            1,064            259


Significant restrictions to access or use the Group’s assets
Statutory, contractual or regulatory requirements as well as protective rights of noncontrolling interests might restrict the ability
of the Group to access and transfer assets freely to or from other entities within the Group and to settle liabilities of the Group.

The following restrictions impact the Group’s ability to use assets:

– The Group has pledged assets to collateralize its obligations under repurchase agreements, securities financing
  transactions, collateralized loan obligations and for margining purposes for OTC derivative liabilities.
– The assets of consolidated structured entities are held for the benefit of the parties that have bought the notes issued by
  these entities.
– Regulatory and central bank requirements or local corporate laws may restrict the Group’s ability to transfer assets to or
  from other entities within the Group in certain jurisdictions.

Restricted assets
                                                                                                       Dec 31, 2021                  Dec 31, 2020
                                                                                               Total     Restricted          Total     Restricted
in € m.                                                                                       assets        assets          assets        assets
Interest-earning deposits with banks                                                       180,942            196        152,143            153
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                      491,233         55,325        527,941         52,494
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                           28,979          6,648         55,834          8,110
Loans at amortized cost                                                                    471,319         79,764        426,995         78,144
Other                                                                                      151,521          3,233        162,346          3,316
Total                                                                                    1,323,993        145,166      1,325,259        142,217


The table above excludes assets that are not encumbered at an individual entity level but which may be subject to restrictions
in terms of their transferability within the Group. Such restrictions may be based on local connected lending requirements or
similar regulatory restrictions. In this situation, it is not feasible to identify individual balance sheet items that cannot be
transferred. This is also the case for regulatory minimum liquidity requirements. The Group identifies the volume of liquidity
reserves in excess of local stress liquidity outflows. The aggregate amount of such liquidity reserves that are considered
restricted for this purpose is € 25.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 (as of December 31, 2020: € 43.5 billion).




                                                                                                                                           318
Deutsche Bank                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                38 – Structured entities




38 – Structured entities
Nature, purpose and extent of the Group’s interests in structured entities
The Group engages in various business activities with structured entities which are designed to achieve a specific business
purpose. A structured entity is one that has been set up so that any voting rights or similar rights are not the dominant factor
in deciding who controls the entity. An example is when voting rights relate only to administrative tasks and the relevant
activities are directed by contractual arrangements.

A structured entity often has some or all of the following features or attributes:

–   Restricted activities;
–   A narrow and well defined objective;
–   Insufficient equity to permit the structured entity to finance its activities without subordinated financial support;
–   Financing in the form of multiple contractually linked instruments to investors that create concentrations of credit or other
    risks (tranches).

The principal uses of structured entities are to provide clients with access to specific portfolios of assets and to provide market
liquidity for clients through securitizing financial assets. Structured entities may be established as corporations, trusts or
partnerships. Structured entities generally finance the purchase of assets by issuing debt and equity securities that are
collateralized by and/or indexed to the assets held by the structured entities. The debt and equity securities issued by
structured entities may include tranches with varying levels of subordination.

Structured entities are consolidated when the substance of the relationship between the Group and the structured entities
indicate that the structured entities are controlled by the Group, as discussed in Note 1 “Significant Accounting Policies and
Critical Accounting Estimates”.


Consolidated structured entities
The Group has contractual arrangements which may require it to provide financial support to the following types of
consolidated structured entities.

Securitization vehicles
The Group uses securitization vehicles for funding purchase of diversified pool of assets. The Group provides financial support
to these entities in the form of liquidity facility. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding
loan commitments to these entities.

Funds
The Group may provide funding and liquidity facility or guarantees to funds consolidated by the group. As of Decem-
ber 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the notional value of the liquidity facilities and guarantees provided by the Group to
such funds was € 1.2 billion and € 1.0 billion, respectively.

Deutsche Bank did not provide non-contractual support during the year to consolidated structured entities.


Unconsolidated structured entities
These are entities which are not consolidated because the Group does not control them through voting rights, contract, funding
agreements, or other means. The extent of the Group’s interests to unconsolidated structured entities will vary depending on
the type of structured entities.

Below is a description of the Group’s involvements in unconsolidated structured entities by type.

Repackaging and investment entities
Repackaging and investment entities are established to meet clients’ investment needs through the combination of securities
and derivatives. These entities are not consolidated by the Group because the Group does not have power to influence the
returns obtained from the entities. These entities are usually set up to provide a certain investment return pre-agreed with the
investor, and the Group is not able to change the investment strategy or return during the life of the transaction.




                                                                                                                             319
Deutsche Bank                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                38 – Structured entities




Third party funding entities
The Group provides funding to structured entities that hold a variety of assets. These entities may take the form of funding
entities, trusts and private investment companies. The funding is collateralized by the asset in the structured entities. The
group’s involvement involves predominantly both lending and loan commitments.

The vehicles used in these transactions are controlled by the borrowers where the borrowers have the ability to decide whether
to post additional margin or collateral in respect of the financing. In such cases, where borrowers can decide to continue or
terminate the financing, the borrowers will consolidate the vehicle.

Securitization Vehicles
The Group establishes securitization vehicles which purchase diversified pools of assets, including fixed income securities,
corporate loans, and asset-backed securities (predominantly commercial and residential mortgage-backed securities and
credit card receivables). The vehicles fund these purchases by issuing multiple tranches of debt and equity securities, the
repayment of which is linked to the performance of the assets in the vehicles.

The Group may transfer assets to these securitization vehicles and provides financial support to these entities in the form of
liquidity facilities.

The Group also invests and provides liquidity facilities to third party sponsored securitization vehicles.

The securitization vehicles that are not consolidated into the Group are those where the Group does not hold the power or
ability to unilaterally remove the servicer or special servicer who has been delegated power over the activities of the entity.

Funds
The Group establishes structured entities to accommodate client requirements to hold investments in specific assets. The
Group also invests in funds that are sponsored by third parties. A group entity may act as fund manager, custodian or some
other capacity and provide funding and liquidity facilities to both group sponsored and third party funds. The funding provided
is collateralized by the underlying assets held by the fund.

The Group does not consolidate funds when Deutsche Bank is deemed agent or when another third party investor has the
ability to direct the activities of the fund.

Other
These are Deutsche Bank sponsored or third party structured entities that do not fall into any criteria above. These entities
are not consolidated by the Group when the Group does not hold power over the decision making of these entities.

Income derived from involvement with structured entities
The Group earns management fees and, occasionally, performance-based fees for its investment management service in
relation to funds. Interest income is recognized on the funding provided to structured entities. Any trading revenue as a result
of derivatives with structured entities and from the movements in the value of notes held in these entities is recognized in ‘Net
gains/losses on financial assets/liabilities held at fair value through profit and loss’.

Interests in unconsolidated structured entities
The Group’s interests in unconsolidated structured entities refer to contractual and non-contractual involvement that exposes
the Group to variability of returns from the performance of the structured entities. Examples of interests in unconsolidated
structured entities include debt or equity investments, liquidity facilities, guarantees and certain derivative instruments in which
the Group is absorbing variability of returns from the structured entities.

Interests in unconsolidated structured entities exclude instruments which introduce variability of returns into the structured
entities. For example, when the Group purchases credit protection from an unconsolidated structured entity whose purpose
and design is to pass through credit risk to investors, the Group is providing the variability of returns to the entity rather than
absorbing variability. The purchased credit protection is therefore not considered as an interest for the purpose of the table
below.

Maximum exposure to unconsolidated structured entities
The maximum exposure to loss is determined by considering the nature of the interest in the unconsolidated structured entity.
The maximum exposure for loans and trading instruments is reflected by their carrying amounts in the consolidated balance
sheet. The maximum exposure for derivatives and off balance sheet commitments such as guarantees, liquidity facilities and
loan commitments under IFRS 12, as interpreted by the Group, is reflected by the notional amounts. Such amounts or their
development do not reflect the economic risks faced by the Group because they do not take into account the effects of
collateral or hedges nor the probability of such losses being incurred. At December 31, 2021, the notional related to the positive
and negative replacement values of derivatives and off balance sheet commitments were € 104 billion, € 296 billion and




                                                                                                                              320
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       38 – Structured entities




€ 22 billion respectively. At December 31, 2020, the notional related to the positive and negative replacement values of
derivatives and off balance sheet commitments were € 78 billion, € 238 billion and € 16 billion respectively.

Size of structured entities

The Group provides a different measure for size of structured entities depending on their type. The following measures have
been considered as appropriate indicators for evaluating the size of structured entities:

– Funds – Net asset value or assets under management where the Group holds fund units and notional of derivatives when
  the Group’s interest comprises of derivatives.
– Securitizations – notional of notes in issue (excluding interest only and excess notes where applicable) when the Group
  derives its interests through notes its holds and notional of derivatives when the Group’s interests is in the form of
  derivatives.
– Third party funding entities –Total assets in entities
– Repackaging and investment entities – Fair value of notes in issue

For Third party funding entities, size information is not publicly available, therefore the Group has disclosed the greater of the
collateral the Group has received/pledged or the notional of the exposure the Group has to the entity.

Based on the above definitions, the total size of structured entities is € 2,168 billion, of which the majority of € 1,251 billion is
from Funds. In 2020, it was € 1,878 billion and € 1,088 billion respectively.

The following table shows, by type of structured entity, the carrying amounts of the Group’s interests recognized in the
consolidated statement of financial position as well as the maximum exposure to loss resulting from these interests. The
carrying amounts presented below do not reflect the true variability of returns faced by the Group because they do not take
into account the effects of collateral or hedges.

Carrying amounts and size relating to Deutsche Bank’s interests
                                                                                                                         Dec 31, 2021
                                                                       Repacka-
                                                                        ging and    Third Party
                                                                     Investment       Funding      Securiti-
in € m.                                                                  Entities       Entities    zations     Funds           Total
Assets
Cash and central bank balances                                                 0              0           0        0               0
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                         1              0           0       11              12
Central bank funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements                                              0              0         82      1,593          1,675
Securities Borrowed                                                            0              0          0          0              0
Total financial assets at fair value
through profit or loss                                                      328         7,860       4,923      44,192        57,303
   Trading assets                                                           172         4,825       3,243       3,980        12,220
   Positive market values
   (derivative financial instruments)                                       156            300            9     2,671          3,135
   Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value
   through profit or loss                                                      0        2,735       1,671      37,542        41,948
   Financial assets designated at fair
   value through profit or loss                                                0              0           0        0               0
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive
income                                                                       0            298       1,043         530         1,871
Loans at amortized cost                                                  1,089         60,338      26,406      15,245       103,079
Other assets                                                                 4            575       3,333      12,202        16,114
Total assets                                                             1,422         69,072      35,787      73,773       180,054

Liabilities
Total financial liabilities at fair value
through profit or loss                                                       74            185          20      8,721          9,000
   Negative market values
   (derivative financial instruments)                                       74            185          20       8,721         9,000
Other short-term borrowings                                                  0              0           0           0             0
Other liabilities                                                            0              0           0          13            13
Total liabilities                                                           74            185          20       8,734         9,013
Off-balance sheet exposure                                                   0          7,765      10,093       3,683        21,541
Total                                                                    1,348         76,652      45,861      68,722       192,582




                                                                                                                               321
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       38 – Structured entities




                                                                                                                        Dec 31, 2020
                                                                       Repacka-
                                                                        ging and    Third Party
                                                                     Investment       Funding      Securiti-
in € m.                                                                  Entities       Entities    zations     Funds          Total
Assets
Cash and central bank balances                                                 0              0           0        0              0
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                         1              0           0       12             13
Central bank funds sold and securities
purchased under resale agreements                                              0           126            0     1,901         2,027
Securities Borrowed                                                            0             0            0         0             0
Total financial assets at fair value
through profit or loss                                                      340         6,368       4,428      50,316       61,452
   Trading assets                                                           181         4,134       2,408       4,304       11,027
   Positive market values
   (derivative financial instruments)                                       158            154          31      3,635         3,977
   Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value
   through profit or loss                                                      0        2,080       1,990      42,377       46,448
   Financial assets designated at fair
   value through profit or loss                                                0              0           0        0              0
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive
income                                                                        0           333         457         270        1,060
Loans at amortized cost                                                     165        46,867      27,638      10,270       84,939
Other assets                                                                 51           400       3,065      20,499       24,015
Total assets                                                                557        54,096      35,587      83,267      173,508

Liabilities
Total financial liabilities at fair value
through profit or loss                                                       92             58          10     11,191       11,351
   Negative market values
   (derivative financial instruments)                                        92            58          10      11,191       11,351
Other short-term borrowings                                                   0             0           0           0            0
Other liabilities                                                             0             0           0       1,815        1,815
Total liabilities                                                            92            58          10      13,006       13,166
Off-balance sheet exposure                                                    0         5,889       8,279       1,944       16,112
Total                                                                       466        59,927      43,856      72,205      176,453



Trading assets –Total trading assets as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 of € 12.2 billion and € 11.0 billion are
comprised primarily of € 3.2 billion and € 2.4 billion in Securitizations and € 4.0 billion and € 4.3 billion in Funds structured
entities respectively. The Group’s interests in securitizations are collateralized by the assets contained in these entities. Where
the Group holds fund units these are typically in regards to market making in funds or otherwise serve as hedges for notes
issued to clients. Moreover the credit risk arising from loans made to Third party funding structured entities is mitigated by the
collateral received.

Non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair value through profit or loss – Reverse repurchase agreements to Funds
comprise the majority of the interests in this category and are collateralized by the underlying securities.

Loans – Loans as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 consist of € 103.1 billion and € 84.9 billion investment in
securitization tranches and financing to Third party funding entities. The Group’s financing to Third party funding entities is
collateralized by the assets in those structured entities.

Other assets – Other assets as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 of € 16.1 billion and € 24.0 billion, respectively,
consist primarily of prime brokerage receivables and cash margin balances.

Pending Receivables – Pending Receivable balances are not included in this disclosure note due to the fact that these balances
arise from typical customer supplier relationships out of e.g. brokerage type activities and their inherent volatility would not
provide users of the financial statements with effective information about Deutsche Bank’s exposures to structured entities.

Financial support
Deutsche Bank did not provide non-contractual support during the year to unconsolidated structured entities.




                                                                                                                              322
Deutsche Bank                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                     39 – Current and non-current assets and liabilities




Sponsored unconsolidated structured entities where the Group has no interest as
of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
As a sponsor, the Group is involved in the legal set up and marketing of the entity and supports the entity in different ways,
namely:

–   transferring assets to the entities
–   providing seed capital to the entities
–   providing operational support to ensure the entity’s continued operation
–   providing guarantees of performance to the structured entities.

The Group is also deemed a sponsor for a structured entity if market participants would reasonably associate the entity with
the Group. Additionally, the use of the Deutsche Bank name for the structured entity indicates that the Group has acted as a
sponsor.

The gross revenues from sponsored entities where the Group did not hold an interest as of December 31, 2021 and
December 31, 2020 were € 254 million and € (134) million respectively. Instances where the Group does not hold an interest
in an unconsolidated sponsored structured entity include cases where any seed capital or funding to the structured entity has
already been repaid in full to the Group during the year. This amount does not take into account the impacts of hedges and is
recognized in Net gains/losses on financial assets/liabilities at fair value through profit and loss. The aggregated carrying
amounts of assets transferred to sponsored unconsolidated structured entities in 2021 were € 3.2 billion for securitization and
€ 1.4 billion for repackaging and investment entities. In 2020, they were € 1.4 billion for securitization and € 1.2 billion for
repackaging and investment entities.


39 – Current and non-current assets and liabilities
Asset and liability line items by amounts recovered or settled within or after one
year
Asset items as of December 31, 2021
                                                                                                             Amounts recovered or settled          Total
in € m.                                                                                                within one year     after one year   Dec 31, 2021
Cash and central bank balances                                                                               192,012                 9         192,021
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                                                         7,318                24           7,342
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements                                       5,904             2,465           8,368
Securities borrowed                                                                                               63                 0              63
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                                        483,183             8,050         491,233
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                              6,995            21,984          28,979
Equity method investments                                                                                          0             1,091           1,091
Loans at amortized cost                                                                                      132,516           338,803         471,319
Property and equipment                                                                                             0             5,536           5,536
Goodwill and other intangible assets                                                                               0             6,824           6,824
Other assets                                                                                                  87,654            16,131         103,785
Assets for current tax                                                                                           717               497           1,214
Total assets before deferred tax assets                                                                      916,360           401,415       1,317,775
Deferred tax assets                                                                                                                              6,218
Total assets                                                                                                                                 1,323,993




                                                                                                                                                  323
Deutsche Bank                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                     39 – Current and non-current assets and liabilities




Liability items as of December 31, 2021
                                                                                                               Amounts recovered or settled          Total
in € m.                                                                                                within one year       after one year   Dec 31, 2021
Deposits                                                                                                       582,278            21,472         603,750
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements                                       297               450             747
Securities loaned                                                                                                   24                 0              24
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                                     398,203             2,653         400,857
Other short-term borrowings                                                                                      4,034                 0           4,034
Other liabilities                                                                                               96,138             1,658          97,796
Provisions                                                                                                       2,641                 0           2,641
Liabilities for current tax                                                                                        411               189             600
Long-term debt                                                                                                  49,434            95,051         144,485
Trust preferred securities                                                                                         528                 0             528
Total liabilities before deferred tax liabilities                                                            1,133,988           121,474       1,255,462
Deferred tax liabilities                                                                                                                             501
Total liabilities                                                                                                                              1,255,962


Asset items as of December 31, 2020
                                                                                                               Amounts recovered or settled          Total
in € m.                                                                                                within one year       after one year   Dec 31, 2020
Cash and central bank balances                                                                                166,208                  0         166,208
Interbank balances (w/o central banks)                                                                          9,120                 11           9,130
Central bank funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements                                        4,728              3,805           8,533
Securities borrowed                                                                                                 0                  0               0
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss                                                         515,614             12,327         527,941
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income                                              14,393             41,441          55,834
Equity method investments                                                                                           0                901             901
Loans at amortized cost                                                                                       111,892            315,103         426,995
Property and equipment                                                                                              0              5,549           5,549
Goodwill and other intangible assets                                                                                0              6,725           6,725
Other assets                                                                                                   94,685             15,714         110,399
Assets for current tax                                                                                            300                686             986
Total assets before deferred tax assets                                                                       916,939            402,262       1,319,201
Deferred tax assets                                                                                                                                6,058
Total assets                                                                                                                                   1,325,259


Liability items as of December 31, 2020
                                                                                                               Amounts recovered or settled          Total
in € m.                                                                                                within one year       after one year   Dec 31, 2020
Deposits                                                                                                       544,669            23,362         568,031
Central bank funds purchased and securities sold under repurchase agreements                                     1,830               495           2,325
Securities loaned                                                                                                1,698                 0           1,698
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                                                     416,042             3,157         419,199
Other short-term borrowings                                                                                      3,553                 0           3,553
Other liabilities                                                                                              112,617             1,592         114,208
Provisions                                                                                                       2,430                 0           2,430
Liabilities for current tax                                                                                        328               246             574
Long-term debt                                                                                                  59,626            89,537         149,163
Trust preferred securities                                                                                       1,321                 0           1,321
Total liabilities before deferred tax liabilities                                                            1,144,113           118,389       1,262,502
Deferred tax liabilities                                                                                                                             561
Total liabilities                                                                                                                              1,263,063




                                                                                                                                                    324
Deutsche Bank                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                40 – Events after the reporting period




40 – Events after the reporting period
On February 24, 2022, Russia commenced a large-scale invasion against Ukraine. In response, the West has moved to
impose broad-based sanctions targeting Russia, including but not limited to certain Russian banks and the Russian Central
Bank, companies, parliamentary members and members of the Russian elite and their families. It is possible that additional
sanctions and other measures may be imposed in the future. Developments with regards to the military conflict are fast moving
and the extent of any financial and non-financial impact on the Group is currently not known.

As of December 31, 2021, the Group’s operating subsidiary in Russia, OOO "Deutsche Bank" (DB Moscow), had capital of €
0.2 billion, with the foreign currency risk being actively managed and fully hedged as of January 2022. Total assets of DB
Moscow amounted to € 1.5 billion, of which approximately € 0.5 billion (Russian Ruble equivalent) was deposited with the
Central Bank in Russia. The Group also operates a technology service center in Russia, OOO "Deutsche Bank TechCentre"
(DBTC), which is one of several technology centers around the world, with close to 1,600 employees at the end of 2021
(approximately 5 % of the Group’s technology workforce). The Group is continuously assessing the operational setup of DBTC,
which could result in additional costs to our cost base in the future.

As of December 31, 2021, the Group’s loan exposure to Russia amounted to € 1.4 billion on a gross basis, which represents
approximately 0.3 % of the total loan book. On a net basis, after taking into account guarantees and asset collateral, the loan
exposure amounted to € 0.6 billion. The majority of this loan exposure relates to large Russian companies with material
operations and cash-flow outside of Russia. Loans may be provided onshore by DB Moscow, or offshore by other Group
entities outside of Russia. In addition, the wealth management business has offshore loans to counterparties with a Russian
connection, collateralized in line with the Group’s policies. As of December 31, 2021, the Group also had derivative exposures
to Russia. The majority of these positions are currently in the process of being unwound with the Group being in a net liability
position. Accordingly, no additional material credit risk exists, while contagion market risk and settlement risk may arise. In
addition, as of December 31, 2021, exposures related to undrawn commitments amounted to € 1.0 billion and to written
financial and trade guarantees to € 0.5 billion.

The Group has managed its market risk to Russia by performing regular risk assessments of its risk profile. To mitigate a
broader contagion risk, action was taken was to reduce direct exposure prior to and immediately after events unfolded. This
was achieved by entering into additional hedges and selective de-risking. The Group continues to closely monitor the situation
by performing further contagion stress testing on different scenarios, with a key focus on potential reactions from the Central
Bank of Russia.

The Group’s financial and non-financial exposure to Ukraine is not material but is being closely monitored.

Overall, the potential financial and non-financial impact of the ongoing situation on the Group will depend on how the crisis
unfolds. The crisis and its impact on local and global economic conditions could impact our ability to generate revenues or
meet our financial targets, increase our costs, negatively impact specific portfolios, result in higher-than-expected credit losses
or potential impairments of assets, and potentially have a negative impact on our operations in Russia or Ukraine. Given the
uncertainty of the situation, it is currently not possible to estimate any future impact on the financial statements.




                                                                                                                             325
Deutsche Bank                                    Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                               41 – Regulatory capital information




41 – Regulatory capital information
General definitions
The calculation of our own funds incorporates the capital requirements following the “Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on
prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms” (Capital Requirements Regulation or “CRR”) and the
“Directive 2013/36/EU on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and
investment firms” (Capital Requirements Directive or “CRD”) which have been further amended with subsequent Regulations
and Directives. The CRD has been implemented into German law. The information in this section as well as in the section
“Development of risk-weighted Assets” is based on the regulatory principles of consolidation.

This section refers to the capital adequacy of the group of entities consolidated for banking regulatory purposes pursuant to
the CRR and the German Banking Act (“Kreditwesengesetz” or “KWG”). Therein not included are insurance companies or
companies outside the finance sector.

The total own funds pursuant to the effective regulations as of year-end 2021 comprises Tier 1 and Tier 2 (T2) capital. Tier 1
capital is subdivided into Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital and Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital.

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital consists primarily of common share capital (reduced by own holdings) including related
share premium accounts, retained earnings (including losses for the financial year, if any) and accumulated other
comprehensive income, subject to regulatory adjustments (i.e. prudential filters and deductions), as well as minority interests
qualifying for inclusion in consolidated CET1 capital. Prudential filters for CET 1 capital, according to Articles 32 to 35 CRR,
include (i) securitization gains on sale, (ii) cash flow hedges and changes in the value of own liabilities, and (iii) additi onal
value adjustments. CET 1 capital deductions for instance includes (i) intangible assets (exceeding their prudential value), (ii)
deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability, (iii) negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss
amounts, (iv) net defined benefit pension fund assets, (v) reciprocal cross holdings in the capital of financial sector entities
and, (vi) significant and non-significant investments in the capital (CET 1, AT1, T2) of financial sector entities above certain
thresholds. All items not deducted (i.e., amounts below the threshold) are subject to risk-weighting.

Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital consists of AT1 capital instruments and related share premium accounts as well as
noncontrolling interests qualifying for inclusion in consolidated AT1 capital. To qualify as AT1 capital under CRR/CRD,
instruments must have principal loss absorption through a conversion to common shares or a write-down mechanism
allocating losses at a trigger point and must also meet further requirements (perpetual with no incentive to redeem; institution
must have full dividend/coupon discretion at all times, etc.).

Tier 2 (T2) capital comprises eligible capital instruments, the related share premium accounts and subordinated long-term
debt, certain loan loss provisions and noncontrolling interests that qualify for inclusion in consolidated T2 capital. To qualify
as T2 capital, capital instruments or subordinated debt must have an original maturity of at least five years. Moreover, eligible
capital instruments may inter alia not contain an incentive to redeem, a right of investors to accelerate repayment, or a credit
sensitive dividend feature

We present in this report certain figures based on the CRR definition of own fund instruments applicable for Additional Tier 1

(AT1) capital and Tier 2 (T2) capital and figures based thereon, (including Tier 1, Total Capital and Leverage Ratio) on a “fully
loaded” basis. We calculate such “fully loaded” figures excluding the transitional arrangements for own fund instruments as
provided in the currently applicable CRR/CRD.

Our CET1 and RWA figures include the transitional impacts from the IFRS 9 add-back also in the “fully-loaded” figures given
it is an immaterial difference.

Transitional arrangements are applicable for AT1 and T2 instruments. Capital instruments issued on or prior to December 31,
2011, that no longer qualify as AT1 or T2 capital under the fully loaded CRR/CRD as currently applicable are subject to
grandfathering rules during the transitional period and are being phased out from 2013 to 2022 with their recognition capped
at 20 % in 2020 and 10 % in 2021 (in relation to the portfolio eligible for grandfathering which was still in issue on December
31, 2012) with grandfathering phasing out completely from January 1, 2022.

The current CRR as applicable since June 27, 2019 provides further grandfathering rules for AT1 and T2 instruments issued
prior to June 27, 2019. Thereunder, AT1 and T2 instruments issued through special purpose entities are grandfathered until
December 31, 2021. Beyond 2021, transitional arrangements only exist for AT1 and T2 instruments which continue to qualify
until June 26, 2025 even if they do not meet certain new requirements that apply since June 27, 2019. We have immaterial
amounts of such instruments outstanding at yearend 2021, which practically removes the difference between “fully loaded”
and “transitional” AT1 and T2 instruments starting from January 1, 2022.


                                                                                                                            326
Deutsche Bank                                    Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                               41 – Regulatory capital information




We believe that these “fully loaded” calculations provide useful information to investors as they reflect our progress against
known future regulatory capital standards. Many of our competitors have been describing calculations on a “fully loaded” basis,
however, our competitors’ assumptions and estimates regarding “fully loaded” calculations may vary such that, our “fully
loaded” measures may not be comparable with similarly labelled measures used by our competitors.


Capital instruments
Our Management Board received approval from the 2020 Annual General Meeting to buy back up to 206.7 million shares
before the end of April 2025. Thereof 103.3 million shares can be purchased by using derivatives, this includes 41.3 million
derivatives with a maturity exceeding 18 months. During the period from the 2020 Annual General Meeting until the 2021
Annual General Meeting (May 27, 2021), 28.7 million shares were purchased. The shares purchased were used for equity
compensation purposes in the same period or are to be used in the upcoming period so that the number of shares held in
Treasury from buybacks was 3.7 million as of the 2021 Annual General Meeting.

The 2021 Annual General Meeting granted our Management Board the approval to buy back up to 206.7 million shares before
the end of April 2026. Thereof 103.3 million shares can be purchased by using derivatives, this includes 41.3 million derivatives
with a maturity exceeding 18 months. These authorizations substitute the authorizations of the previous year. During the
period from the 2021 Annual General Meeting until December 31, 2021, 4.0 million shares and 24.0 million call options were
purchased. The shares in inventory are to be used in this period or upcoming periods for equity compensation purposes; the
number of shares held in Treasury from buybacks was 0.7 million as of December 31, 2021. The call options are to be used
also for equity compensation purposes in the upcoming periods.

Since the 2017 Annual General Meeting, renewed at the 2021 Annual General Meeting, and as of December 31, 2021,
authorized capital available to the Management Board is € 2,560 million (1,000 million shares). As of December 31, 2021, the
conditional capital against cash stands at € 512 million (200 million shares). The Management Board has decided that it will
not make use of this conditional capital. Additional conditional capital for equity compensation amounts to € 51.2 million (20
million shares). Further, the 2018 Annual General Meeting authorized the issuance of participatory notes and other Hybrid
Debt Securities that fulfill the regulatory requirements to qualify as Additional Tier 1 capital with an equivalent value of € 8.0
billion.

Our legacy Hybrid Tier 1 capital instruments (substantially all noncumulative trust preferred securities) are not recognized
under fully loaded CRR/CRD rules as Additional Tier 1 capital, mainly because they have no write-down or equity conversion
feature. During the transitional phase-out period the maximum recognizable amount of Additional Tier 1 instruments from
Basel 2.5 compliant issuances as of December 31, 2012 will be reduced at the beginning of each financial year by 10 % or
€ 1.3 billion, through 2022. For December 31, 2021, this resulted in eligible Additional Tier 1 instruments of € 8.9 billion (i.e.
€ 8.3 billion AT1 Notes recognized under fully loaded CRR/CRD rules as well as € 0.6 billion of legacy Hybrid Tier 1
instruments recognizable during the transition period; the latter are recognized as regulatory capital as of December 2021 for
the last time). In 2021, the bank issued AT1 notes amounting to € 2.5 billion. Furthermore, the bank redeemed legacy Hybrid
Tier 1 instruments with a notional of € 0.5 billion.

The total of our Tier 2 capital instruments as of December 31, 2021 recognized during the transition period under CRR/CRD
was € 7.4 billion (nominal value of € 8.8 billion). Tier 2 instruments recognized under fully loaded CRR/CRD rules amoun ted
to € 7.3 billion (nominal value of € 8.7 billion). In 2021, the bank issued Tier 2 capital instruments with a nominal value o f
U.S.$ 1.25 billion (equivalent amount of € 1.1 billion). Furthermore, Tier 2 capital instruments with a notional of € 0.3 billion
were redeemed.


Minimum capital requirements and additional capital buffers
Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in supervisory measures such as restrictions of profit distributions or
limitations on certain businesses such as lending. We complied with the regulatory capital adequacy requirements in 2021.




                                                                                                                            327
Deutsche Bank                                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                41 – Regulatory capital information




Details on regulatory capital
Own Funds Template (incl. RWA and capital ratios)
                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021                           Dec 31, 2020 ³
                                                                                                   CRR/CRD                                  CRR/CRD
in € m.                                                                                           fully-loaded         CRR/CRD             fully loaded         CRR/CRD
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital: instruments and reserves
  Capital instruments, related share premium accounts and other reserves                             45,864               45,864              45,890               45,890
  Retained earnings                                                                                  10,506               10,506               9,784                9,784
  Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                            (444)                (444)             (1,118)              (1,118)
  Independently reviewed interim profits net of any foreseeable charge or
  dividend1                                                                                           1,379                1,379                 253                  253
  Other                                                                                                 910                  910                 805                  805
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital before regulatory adjustments                                   58,215               58,215              55,613               55,613

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital: regulatory adjustments
  Additional value adjustments (negative amount)                                                        (1,812)           (1,812)              (1,430)             (1,430)
  Other prudential filters (other than additional value adjustments)                                       (14)              (14)                (112)               (112)
  Goodwill and other intangible assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative
  amount)                                                                                               (4,897)           (4,897)              (4,635)             (4,635)
  Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability excluding those arising
  from
  temporary differences (net of related tax liabilities where the conditions in Art.
  38 (3)
  CRR are met) (negative amount)                                                                        (1,466)           (1,466)              (1,353)             (1,353)
  Negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss amounts                                (573)             (573)                 (99)                (99)
  Defined benefit pension fund assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative
  amount)                                                                                                (991)               (991)               (772)                (772)
  Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by an institution of own CET 1
  instruments (negative amount)                                                                              0                  0                    0                   0
  Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by the institution of the CET 1
  instruments of financial sector entities where the institution has a significant
  investment in those entities (amount above the 10 % / 15 % thresholds and
  net of eligible short positions) (negative amount)                                                         0                  0                    0                   0
  Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (net of related tax
  liabilities where the conditions in Art. 38 (3) CRR are met) (amount above the
  10 % / 15 % thresholds) (negative amount)                                                            (151)                (151)                (75)                 (75)
  Other regulatory adjustments2                                                                      (1,805)              (1,805)             (2,252)              (2,252)
Total regulatory adjustments to Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital                                (11,709)             (11,709)            (10,728)             (10,728)
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital                                                                 46,506               46,506              44,885               44,885

Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital: instruments
  Capital instruments and the related share premium accounts                                            8,328              8,328                5,828               5,828
  Amount of qualifying items referred to in Art. 484 (4) CRR and the related
  share
  premium accounts subject to phase out from AT1                                                         N/M                 600                 N/M                1,100
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital before regulatory adjustments                                           8,328              8,928                5,828               6,928

Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital: regulatory adjustments
  Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by an institution of own AT1
  instruments
  (negative amount)                                                                                        (60)               (60)                (80)                 (80)
  Residual amounts deducted from AT1 capital with regard to deduction from
  CET 1 capital during the transitional period pursuant to Art. 472 CRR                                                                         N/M                  N/M
  Other regulatory adjustments                                                                            0                    0                   0                    0
Total regulatory adjustments to Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital                                         (60)                 (60)                (80)                 (80)
Additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital                                                                       8,268                8,868               5,748                6,848
Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET 1 + AT1)                                                                    54,775               55,375              50,634               51,734

Tier 2 (T2) capital                                                                                   7,328               7,358                6,623               6,944
Total capital (TC = T1 + T2)                                                                         62,102              62,732               57,257              58,677
Total risk-weighted assets                                                                          351,629             351,629              328,951             328,951

Capital ratios
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio (as a percentage of risk-weighted assets)                             13.2                13.2                13.6                 13.6
Tier 1 capital ratio (as a percentage of risk-weighted assets)                                           15.6                15.7                15.4                 15.7
Total capital ratio (as a percentage of risk-weighted assets)                                            17.7                17.8                17.4                 17.8
N/M – Not meaningful
1 Full year profit is recognized as per ECB Decision (EU) 2015/656 in accordance with the Article 26(2) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (ECB/2015/4).
2 Includes capital deductions of 1.1 billion (December 2020: € 0.9 billion) based on ECB guidance on irrevocable payment commitments related to the Single Resolution Fund
  and the Deposit Guarantee Scheme, € 0.7 billion (December 2020: € 0.7 billion) based on ECB’s supervisory recommendation for a prudential provisioning of non-performing
  exposures, € 17 million resulting from minimum value commitments as per Article 36 (1)(n) of the CRR which became effective 30 June 2021 and CET 1 increase of € 39
  million (December 2020: € 54 million) from IFRS 9 transitional provision as per Article 473a of the CRR. Capital deductions of € 0.7 billion, based on regular ECB review,
  included at December 2020, have been released as of December 31, 2021.
3 The Common Equity Tier 1 capital for December 31, 2020 has been updated to reflect a dividend payment of zero for the financial year 2020.



                                                                                                                                                                     328
Deutsche Bank                                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                41 – Regulatory capital information




Reconciliation of shareholders’ equity to Own Funds
                                                                                                                                                                  CRR/CRD
in € m.                                                                                                                                    Dec 31, 2021       Dec 31, 2020 ³
Total shareholders’ equity per accounting balance sheet                                                                                         58,027               54,786
Deconsolidation/Consolidation of entities                                                                                                          265                  265
  Of which:
  Additional paid-in capital                                                                                                                         0                    0
  Retained earnings                                                                                                                                265                  265
  Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax                                                                                          0                    0
Total shareholders' equity per regulatory balance sheet                                                                                         58,292               55,050
Minority Interests (amount allowed in consolidated CET 1)                                                                                          910                  805
AT1 coupon and shareholder dividend deduction1                                                                                                    (987)                (242)
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) capital before regulatory adjustments                                                                              58,215               55,613
Additional value adjustments                                                                                                                    (1,812)              (1,430)
Other prudential filters (other than additional value adjustments)                                                                                 (14)                (112)
Goodwill and other intangible assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                                                         (4,897)              (4,635)
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability                                                                                           (1,617)              (1,428)
Defined benefit pension fund assets (net of related tax liabilities) (negative amount)                                                            (991)                (772)
Direct, indirect and synthetic holdings by the institution of the CET 1 instruments of financial sector entities
where the institution has a significant investment in those entities                                                                                 0                    0
Other regulatory adjustments2                                                                                                                   (2,378)              (2,351)
Common Equity Tier 1 capital                                                                                                                    46,506               44,885
1
  Full year profit is recognized as per ECB Decision (EU) 2015/656 in accordance with the Article 26(2) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (ECB/2015/4).
2
  Includes capital deductions of 1.1 billion (December 2020: € 0.9 billion) based on ECB guidance on irrevocable payment commitments related to the Single Resolution Fund
  and the Deposit Guarantee Scheme, € 0.7 billion (December 2020: € 0.7 billion) based on ECB’s supervisory recommendation for a prudential provisioning of non-performing
  exposures, € 0.6 billion (December 2020: € 0.1 billion) negative amounts resulting from the calculation of expected loss amounts, € 17 million resulting from minimum value
  commitments as per Article 36 (1)(n) of the CRR which became effective 30 June 2021 and CET 1 increase of € 39 million (December 2020: € 54 million) from IFRS 9
  transitional provision as per Article 473a of the CRR. Capital deductions of € 0.7 billion, based on regular ECB review, included at December 2020, have been released as of
  December 31, 2021.
3
  The Common Equity Tier 1 capital for December 31, 2020 has been updated to reflect a dividend payment of zero for the financial year 2020.




Capital management
Our Treasury function manages solvency, capital adequacy, leverage and bail-in capacity ratios at Group level and locally in
each region, as applicable. Treasury implements our capital strategy, which itself is developed by the Group Risk Committee
and approved by the Management Board. Treasury, directly or through the Group Asset and Liability Committee, manages,
among other things, issuance and repurchase of shares and capital instruments, hedging of capital ratios against foreign
exchange swings, setting capacities for key financial resources, design of shareholders’ equity allocation, and regional capital
planning. We are fully committed to maintaining our sound capitalization both from an economic and regulatory perspective.
We continuously monitor and adjust our overall capital demand and supply in an effort to achieve an appropriate balance of
the economic and regulatory considerations at all times and from all perspectives. These perspectives include book equity
based on IFRS accounting standards, regulatory and economic capital as well as specific capital requirements from rating
agencies.

Treasury manages the issuance and repurchase of capital instruments, namely Common Equity Tier 1, Additional Tier 1 and
Tier 2 capital instruments as well as TLAC/MREL eligible debt instruments. Treasury constantly monitors the market for liability
management trades. Such trades represent a countercyclical opportunity to create Common Equity Tier 1 capital by buying
back our issuances below par.

Treasury manages the sensitivity of our capital ratios against swings in currencies. For this purpose, Treasury determines
which currencies are to be hedged, develops suitable hedging strategies in close cooperation with Risk Management and
finally executes these hedges. The capital invested into our foreign subsidiaries and branches in our core currencies Euro,
US Dollar, Chinese Renminbi and Pound Sterling is not hedged in order to balance respective effects from movements in
capital deduction items and risk weighted assets. The capital invested in non-core currencies is either partly hedged taking
capital demand into account or fully hedged.




                                                                                                                                                                       329
Deutsche Bank                                   Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                              41 – Regulatory capital information




Resource limit setting
Usage of key financial resources is influenced through the following governance processes and incentives.

Target resource capacities are reviewed in our annual strategic plan in line with our CET 1 and Leverage Ratio ambitions. As
a part of our quarterly process, the Group Asset and Liability Committee approves divisional resource limits for total capital
demand (defined as the sum of Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) and certain RWA equivalents of Capital Deduction Items) and
leverage exposure that are based on the strategic plan but adjusted for market conditions and the short-term outlook. Limits
are enforced through a close monitoring process and an excess charging mechanism.

Overall regulatory capital requirements are principally driven by either our CET 1 ratio (solvency) or leverage ratio (leverage)
requirements, whichever is the more binding constraint. For the internal capital allocation, the combined contribution of each
segment to the Group’s Common Equity Tier 1 ratio, the Group’s Leverage ratio and the Group’s Capital Loss under Stress
are weighted to reflect their relative importance and level of constraint to the Group. Contributions to the Common Equity
Tier 1 ratio and the Leverage ratio are measured through RWA and Leverage Ratio Exposure (LRE). The Group’s Capital
Loss under Stress is a measure of the Group’s overall economic risk exposure under a defined stress scenario. Goodwill and
other intangible assets are directly allocated to the respective segments, supporting the calculation of the allocated tangible
shareholders equity and the respective rate of return.

Most of our subsidiaries and a number of our branches are subject to legal and regulatory capital requirements. In developing,
implementing and testing our capital and liquidity, we fully take such legal and regulatory requirements into account. Any
material capital requests of our branches and subsidiaries across the globe are presented to and approved by the Group
Investment Committee prior to execution.

Further, Treasury is represented on the Investment Committee of the largest Deutsche Bank pension fund which sets the
investment guidelines for this fund. This representation is intended to ensure that pension assets are aligned with pension
liabilities, thus protecting our capital base.




                                                                                                                          330
Deutsche Bank                                    Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                               42 – Supplementary information to the consolidated financial statements according to Sections 297
                                                 (1a) / 315a HGB and the return on assets according to article 26a of the German Banking Act




42 – Supplementary information to the consolidated financial
statements according to Sections 297 (1a) / 315a HGB and the
return on assets according to article 26a of the German Banking
Act
Staff costs
in € m.                                                                                                                     2021               2020
Staff costs:
Wages and salaries                                                                                                        8,551              8,526
Social security costs                                                                                                     1,867              1,945
  thereof: those relating to pensions                                                                                     1,038              1,111
Total                                                                                                                    10,418             10,471


Staff
The average number of effective staff employed in 2021 was 84,298 (2020: 86,756) of whom 37,359 (2020: 38,193) were
women. Part-time staff is included in these figures proportionately. An average of 47,460 (2020: 46,948) staff members worked
outside Germany.


Management Board and Supervisory Board remuneration
In accordance with the requirements of the GAS 17, the members of the Management Board collectively received in the 2021
financial year compensation totaling € 49,984,668 (2020: € 40,119,062). Of that, € 26,467,225 (2020: € 22,473,664) was for
fixed compensation, € 1,300,000 (2020: € 920,833) for fixed allowances, € 1,115,438 (2020: € 1,353,072) for fringe benefits
and € 21,102,005 (2020: € 15,371,493) for performance-related components.

Former members of the Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG or their surviving dependents received € 38,737,800 and
€ 31,929,318 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

Provisions for pension obligations to former members of the Management Board and their surviving dependents amounted to
€ 184,815,849 and € 198,577,478 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively (prior year comparative aligned to
presentation in the current year).

The compensation principles for Supervisory Board members are set forth in our Articles of Association. The compensation
provisions, which were newly conceived in 2013, were last amended by resolution of the Annual General Meeting on May 27
2021 and became effective on July 23, 2021. The members of the Supervisory Board receive fixed annual compensation. The
annual base compensation amounts to € 100,000 for each Supervisory Board member. The Supervisory Board Chairman
receives twice that amount and the Deputy Chairperson one and a half times that amount. Members and chairs of the
committees of the Supervisory Board are paid additional fixed annual compensation. 75 % of the compensation determined
is disbursed to each Supervisory Board member after submitting invoices within the first three months of the following year.
The other 25 % is converted by the company at the same time into company shares (notional shares) according to the
provisions of the Articles of Association. The share value of this number of shares is paid to the respective Supervisory Board
member in February of the year following his departure from the Supervisory Board or the expiration of his term of office
according to the provisions of the Articles of Association, provided that the member does not leave the Supervisory Board due
to important cause which would have justified dismissal. In case of a change in Supervisory Board membership during the
year, compensation for the financial year will be paid on a pro rata basis, rounded up/down to full months. For the year of
departure, the entire compensation is paid in cash; a forfeiture regulation applies to 25 % of the compensation for that financial
year. The members of the Supervisory Board received for the financial year 2021 a total remuneration of € 6,520,833 (2020:
€ 6,077,083), of which € 4,965,625 will be paid out in spring 2022 (2021: € 4,632,813) according to the provisions of the
Articles of Association.

Loans and advances granted and contingent liabilities assumed for members of the Management Board amounted to
€ 6,476,340 and € 6,516,181 and for members of the Supervisory Board amounted to € 1,559,179 and € 1,546,839 for the
years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Members of the Supervisory Board repaid € 93,771 loans in 2021.




                                                                                                                                               331
Deutsche Bank                                   Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                              42 – Supplementary information to the consolidated financial statements according to Sections 297
                                                (1a) / 315a HGB and the return on assets according to article 26a of the German Banking Act




Return on assets
Article 26a of the German Banking Act defines the return on assets as net profit divided by average total assets. According to
this definition the return on assets was 0.18 % and 0.04 % for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.


Information on the parent company
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft is the parent company of Deutsche Bank Group. It is incorporated in Frankfurt am Main
and is registered in the Commercial Register of the District Court Frankfurt am Main under registration number HRB 30000.


Corporate governance
Deutsche Bank AG has approved the Declaration of Conformity in accordance with section 161 of the German
Corporation Act (AktG). The declaration is published on Deutsche Bank’s website (www.db.com/ir/en/documents.htm).


Principal accountant fees and services
Breakdown of fees charged by Ernst & Young GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft („EY GmbH“) and other EY member firms
Fee category in € m.                                                                                                       2021               2020
Audit fees                                                                                                                   54                 53
   thereof to EY GmbH                                                                                                        42                 40
Audit-related fees                                                                                                            8                  5
   thereof to EY GmbH                                                                                                         6                  4
Tax-related fees                                                                                                              1                  0
   thereof to EY GmbH                                                                                                         0                  0
All other fees                                                                                                                1                  0
   thereof to EY GmbH                                                                                                         0                  0
Total fees                                                                                                                   64                 58


The Audit fees include fees for professional services for the audit of Deutsche Bank AG’s annual financial statements and
consolidated financial statements and do not include audit fees for DWS and its subsidiaries that are not audited by EY. The
Audit-related fees include fees for other assurance services required by law or regulations, in particular for financial service
specific attestation, for quarterly reviews, for spin-off audits and for merger audits, as well as fees for voluntary assurance
services, like voluntary audits for internal management purposes and the issuance of comfort letters. Tax-related fees include
fees for services relating to the preparation and review of tax returns and related compliance assistance and advice, tax
consultation and advice relating to Group tax planning strategies and initiatives and assistance with assessing compliance
with tax regulations.




                                                                                                                                              332
Deutsche Bank                                       Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                  43 – Country by country reporting




43 – Country by country reporting
§ 26a KWG requires annual disclosure of certain information by country. The disclosed information is derived from the IFRS
Group accounts of Deutsche Bank. It is however not reconcilable to other financial information in this report because of specific
requirements published by Bundesbank on December 16, 2014 which include the requirement to present the country
information prior to elimination of cross-border intra group transactions. In line with these Bundesbank requirements, intra
group transactions within the same country are eliminated. These eliminations are identical to the eliminations applied for
internal management reporting on countries.

The geographical location of subsidiaries and branches considers the country of incorporation or residence as well as the
relevant tax jurisdiction. For the names, nature of activity and geographical location of subsidiaries and branches, please refer
to Note 44 “Shareholdings”. In addition, Deutsche Bank AG and its subsidiaries have German and foreign branches, for
example in London, New York and Singapore. The net revenues are composed of net interest revenues and non-interest
revenues.

                                                                                                                                     Dec 31, 2021
                                                                                                   Employees         Profit (loss)     Income tax
                                                                                Net revenues
in € m.                                                                                              (full-time   before income         (expense)/
                                                                                  (Turnover)
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                         equivalent)1                 tax          benefit
Australia                                                                                  292           267                102               (41)
Austria                                                                                     12            72                 (2)               (0)
Belgium                                                                                    183           488                 20                (5)
Brazil                                                                                      61           122                 36               (18)
Canada                                                                                       8            12                  4                (2)
Cayman Islands                                                                               3             0                  2                 0
China                                                                                      202           553                 89               (21)
Czech Republic                                                                              14            40                  3                (1)
France                                                                                      71           193                 (7)               (2)
Germany                                                                                 10,257        35,741              1,266              (261)
Great Britain                                                                            3,862         7,341                 46               (44)
Greece                                                                                      (0)           10                  0                (0)
Hong Kong                                                                                  675           844                121               (20)
Hungary                                                                                     17            50                  5                (1)
India                                                                                      680        14,114                459              (175)
Indonesia                                                                                   90           190                 30               (16)
Ireland                                                                                     11           217                 (2)               (1)
Israel                                                                                      (1)           10                 (1)                0
Italy                                                                                    1,007         3,269                 40                (0)
Japan                                                                                      265           391                 29               (26)
Jersey                                                                                      (0)            0                 (4)               (0)
Luxembourg                                                                                 951           520                565               (95)
Malaysia                                                                                    67           180                 34                (8)
Mauritius                                                                                  (76)            0                (75)               (0)
Mexico                                                                                       4            23                 (7)                0
Netherlands                                                                                221           541                 45                (9)
Pakistan                                                                                    13            84                  5                (2)
Peru                                                                                         2             0                  0                 0
Philippines                                                                                 21         1,333                  3                 4
Poland                                                                                      64           347               (173)                3
Portugal                                                                                    11            42                 (5)               (2)
Qatar                                                                                       (0)            2                  1                (0)
Romania                                                                                      0         1,035                  6                (1)
Russian Fed.                                                                                51         1,722                 26                (6)
Saudi Arabia                                                                                 8            51                (12)                4
Singapore                                                                                  909         1,794                153               (24)
South Africa                                                                                 7            43                (14)               (1)
South Korea                                                                                 90           187                 16                (5)
Spain                                                                                      546         2,273                 30               (11)
Sri Lanka                                                                                   14            61                  6                (1)
Sweden                                                                                       2            27                  4                (1)
Switzerland                                                                                259           595                 23                (5)
Taiwan                                                                                      37           124                  1                 1
Thailand                                                                                    31           107                 (6)                1
Turkey                                                                                      40           108                 22                (6)
UAE                                                                                         10           199                  6                 0
Ukraine                                                                                      5            32                  1                (0)
USA                                                                                      5,475         7,545              1,542              (102)
Vietnam                                                                                     20            71                  8                (2)
1
    Full-time equivalents as of December 31, 2021




                                                                                                                                            333
Deutsche Bank                                 Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                            44 – Shareholdings




44 – Shareholdings

335     Subsidiaries
341     Consolidated Structured Entities
345     Companies accounted for at equity
347     Other Companies, where the holding exceeds 20 %
351     Holdings in large corporations, where the holding exceeds 5 % of the
        voting rights
The following pages show the Shareholdings of Deutsche Bank Group pursuant to Section 313 (2) of the German
Commercial Code (“HGB”).




      Footnotes:

1     Controlled.
2     Status as shareholder with unlimited liability pursuant to Section 313 (2) Number 6 HGB.
3     General Partnership.
4     Only specified assets and related liabilities (silos) of this entity were consolidated.
5     Joint venture.
6     Accounted for at equity due to significant influence.
7     Not controlled.
8     Classified as Structured Entity not to be accounted for at equity under IFRS.
9     Classified as Structured Entity not to be consolidated under IFRS.
10    Preliminary Own funds of € 7,720.4m / Result of € 333.2m (Business Year 2021).
11    Preliminary Own funds of € 9,679.2m / Result of € 155.7m (Business Year 2021).
12    Not consolidated or accounted for at equity as classified as non-trading financial assets mandatory at fair
      value through profit or loss.
13    Own funds of € 17.4m / Result of € 1.8m (Business Year 2020).




                                                                                                                    334
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       44 – Shareholdings




Subsidiaries
                                                                                                                                                Share
                                                                                                                                                    of
Serial                                                                        Domicile of         Foot-                                        Capital
No.      Name of company                                                      company              note       Nature of activity                 in %
1        Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft                                     Frankfurt am Main               Credit Institution
2        ABFS I Incorporated                                                  Lutherville-                    Financial Institution              100.0
                                                                              Timonium
3        ABS MB Ltd.                                                          Lutherville-                    Financial Institution              100.0
                                                                              Timonium
4        Alex. Brown Financial Services Incorporated                          Lutherville-                    Financial Institution              100.0
                                                                              Timonium
5        Alex. Brown Investments Incorporated                                 Lutherville-                    Financial Institution              100.0
                                                                              Timonium
6        Alfred Herrhausen Gesellschaft mbH                                   Berlin                          Other Enterprise                   100.0
7        Ambidexter GmbH i.L.                                                 Frankfurt                       Payment Institution                100.0
8        Argent Incorporated                                                  Lutherville-                    Financial Institution              100.0
                                                                              Timonium
9        Bainpro Nominees Pty Ltd                                             Sydney                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
10       Baldur Mortgages Limited                                             London                          Financial Institution              100.0
11       Bankers Trust Investments Limited (in members' voluntary             London                          Other Enterprise                   100.0
         liquidation)
12       Bayan Delinquent Loan Recovery 1 (SPV-AMC), Inc.                     Makati City                     Financial Institution              100.0
13       Betriebs-Center für Banken AG                                        Frankfurt                       Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
14       Better Financial Services GmbH                                       Berlin                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
15       Better Payment Germany GmbH                                          Berlin                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
16       BHW - Gesellschaft für Wohnungswirtschaft mbH                        Hameln                          Financial Institution              100.0
17       BHW Bausparkasse Aktiengesellschaft                                  Hameln                          Credit Institution                 100.0
18       BHW Holding GmbH                                                     Hameln                          Financial Holding Company          100.0
19       Borfield Sociedad Anonima                                            Montevideo                      Other Enterprise                   100.0
20       Breaking Wave DB Limited                                             London                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
21       BT Globenet Nominees Limited                                         London                          Other Enterprise                   100.0
22       Cardales UK Limited (in members' voluntary liquidation)              London                          Other Enterprise                   100.0
23       Cardea Real Estate S.r.l.                                            Milan                           Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
24       Caribbean Resort Holdings, Inc.                                      New York                    1   Financial Institution                0.0
25       Cathay Advisory (Beijing) Co., Ltd.                                  Beijing                         Other Enterprise                   100.0
26       Cathay Asset Management Company Limited                              Ebène                           Financial Institution              100.0
27       Cathay Capital Company (No 2) Limited                                Ebène                           Financial Institution               67.6
28       Cedar (Luxembourg) S.à r.l.                                          Luxembourg                      Other Enterprise                   100.0
29       China Recovery Fund, LLC                                             Wilmington                      Financial Institution               85.0
30       Cinda - DB NPL Securitization Trust 2003-1                           Wilmington                  1   Financial Institution               10.0
31       Consumo Srl in Liquidazione                                          Milan                           Financial Institution              100.0
32       D B Investments (GB) Limited                                         London                          Financial Holding Company          100.0
33       D&M Turnaround Partners Godo Kaisha                                  Tokyo                           Financial Institution              100.0
34       DB (Barbados) SRL                                                    Christ Church                   Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
35       DB (Malaysia) Nominee (Asing) Sdn. Bhd.                              Kuala Lumpur                    Other Enterprise                   100.0
36       DB (Malaysia) Nominee (Tempatan) Sendirian Berhad                    Kuala Lumpur                    Other Enterprise                   100.0
37       DB Alex. Brown Holdings Incorporated                                 Wilmington                      Financial Institution              100.0
38       DB Aotearoa Investments Limited                                      George Town                     Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
39       DB Beteiligungs-Holding GmbH                                         Frankfurt                       Financial Holding Company          100.0
40       DB Boracay LLC                                                       Wilmington                      Financial Institution              100.0
41       DB Capital Markets (Deutschland) GmbH                                Frankfurt                       Financial Holding Company          100.0
42       DB Cartera de Inmuebles 1, S.A.U.                                    Madrid                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
43       DB Chestnut Holdings Limited                                         George Town                     Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
44       DB Corporate Advisory (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd.                           Kuala Lumpur                    Financial Institution              100.0
45       DB Delaware Holdings (Europe) Limited                                George Town                     Financial Institution              100.0
46       DB Direkt GmbH                                                       Frankfurt                       Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
47       DB Elara LLC                                                         Wilmington                      Financial Institution              100.0
48       DB Energy Trading LLC                                                Wilmington                      Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
49       DB Equipment Leasing, Inc.                                           New York                        Financial Institution              100.0
50       DB Equity Limited                                                    London                          Financial Institution              100.0
51       DB Finance (Delaware), LLC                                           Wilmington                      Financial Institution              100.0
52       DB Global Technology SRL                                             Bucharest                       Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
53       DB Global Technology, Inc.                                           Wilmington                      Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
54       DB Group Services (UK) Limited                                       London                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
55       DB Holdings (New York), Inc.                                         New York                        Financial Institution              100.0
56       DB HR Solutions GmbH                                                 Eschborn                        Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
57       DB Immobilienfonds 5 Wieland KG i.L.                                 Frankfurt                       Other Enterprise                    93.6
58       DB Impact Investment Fund I, L.P.                                    Edinburgh                   2   Financial Institution              100.0
59       DB Industrial Holdings Beteiligungs GmbH & Co. KG                    Luetzen                     2   Financial Institution              100.0
60       DB Industrial Holdings GmbH                                          Luetzen                         Financial Institution              100.0



                                                                                                                                                335
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                           Share
                                                                                                                                               of
Serial                                                                        Domicile of    Foot-                                        Capital
No.      Name of company                                                      company         note       Nature of activity                 in %
61       DB Intermezzo LLC                                                    Wilmington               Financial Institution                100.0
62       DB International (Asia) Limited                                      Singapore                Credit Institution                   100.0
63       DB International Investments Limited                                 London                   Financial Institution                100.0
64       DB International Trust (Singapore) Limited                           Singapore                Other Enterprise                     100.0
65       DB Investment Managers, Inc.                                         Wilmington               Financial Institution                100.0
66       DB Investment Partners Limited                                       London                   Financial Institution                100.0
67       DB Investment Partners, Inc.                                         Wilmington               Financial Institution                100.0
68       DB Investment Resources (US) Corporation                             Wilmington               Financial Institution                100.0
69       DB Investment Resources Holdings Corp.                               Wilmington               Financial Institution                100.0
70       DB Investment Services GmbH                                          Frankfurt                Ancillary Services Undertaking       100.0
71       DB Io LP                                                             Wilmington             2 Financial Institution                100.0
72       DB IROC Leasing Corp.                                                New York                 Financial Institution                100.0
73       DB London (Investor Services) Nominees Limited                       London                   Financial Institution                100.0
74       DB Management Support GmbH                                           Frankfurt                Ancillary Services Undertaking       100.0
75       DB Nominees (Hong Kong) Limited                                      Hong Kong                Ancillary Services Undertaking       100.0
76       DB Nominees (Jersey) Limited                                         St. Helier               Other Enterprise                     100.0
77       DB Nominees (Singapore) Pte Ltd                                      Singapore                Other Enterprise                     100.0
78       DB Omega BTV S.C.S.                                                  Luxembourg             2 Financial Institution                100.0
79       DB Omega Holdings LLC                                                Wilmington               Financial Institution                100.0
80       DB Omega Ltd.                                                        George Town              Financial Institution                100.0
81       DB Omega S.C.S.                                                      Luxembourg             2 Financial Institution                100.0
82       DB Operaciones y Servicios Interactivos Agrupación de Interés        Madrid                   Ancillary Services Undertaking        99.9
         Económico
83       DB Overseas Finance Delaware, Inc.                                   Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
84       DB Overseas Holdings Limited                                         London                     Financial Institution              100.0
85       DB Print GmbH                                                        Frankfurt                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
86       DB Private Clients Corp.                                             Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
87       DB Private Wealth Mortgage Ltd.                                      New York                   Financial Institution              100.0
88       DB Re S.A.                                                           Luxembourg                 Reinsurance Undertaking            100.0
89       DB Service Centre Limited                                            Dublin                     Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
90       DB Service Uruguay S.A.                                              Montevideo                 Financial Institution              100.0
91       DB Services (Jersey) Limited                                         St. Helier                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
92       DB Services Americas, Inc.                                           Wilmington                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
93       DB Servizi Amministrativi S.r.l.                                     Milan                      Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
94       DB Strategic Advisors, Inc.                                          Makati City                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
95       DB Structured Derivative Products, LLC                               Wilmington                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
96       DB Structured Products, Inc.                                         Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
97       DB Trustee Services Limited                                          London                     Other Enterprise                   100.0
98       DB Trustees (Hong Kong) Limited                                      Hong Kong                  Other Enterprise                   100.0
99       DB U.S. Financial Markets Holding Corporation                        Wilmington                 Financial Holding Company          100.0
100      DB UK Bank Limited                                                   London                     Credit Institution                 100.0
101      DB UK Holdings Limited                                               London                     Financial Institution              100.0
102      DB UK PCAM Holdings Limited                                          London                     Financial Institution              100.0
103      DB USA Core Corporation                                              West Trenton               Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
104      DB USA Corporation                                                   Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
105      DB Valoren S.à r.l.                                                  Luxembourg                 Financial Holding Company          100.0
106      DB Value S.à r.l.                                                    Luxembourg                 Financial Institution              100.0
107      DB VersicherungsManager GmbH                                         Frankfurt                  Other Enterprise                   100.0
108      DB Vita S.A.                                                         Luxembourg                 Insurance Undertaking               75.0
109      DBAH Capital, LLC                                                    Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
110      DBCIBZ1                                                              George Town                Financial Institution              100.0
111      DBFIC, Inc.                                                          Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
112      DBNZ Overseas Investments (No.1) Limited                             George Town                Financial Institution              100.0
113      DBOI Global Services (UK) Limited                                    London                     Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
114      DBR Investments Co. Limited                                          George Town                Financial Institution              100.0
115      DBRE Global Real Estate Management IB, Ltd.                          George Town                Asset Management Company           100.0
116      DBRMS4                                                               George Town      2, 3      Financial Institution              100.0
117      DBRMSGP1                                                             George Town      2, 3      Financial Institution              100.0
118      DBUK PCAM Limited                                                    London                     Financial Holding Company          100.0
119      DBUKH No. 2 Limited (in members' voluntary liquidation)              London                 1   Financial Institution                0.0
120      DBUSBZ1, LLC                                                         Wilmington                 Other Enterprise                   100.0
121      DBUSBZ2, S.à r.l.                                                    Luxembourg                 Financial Institution              100.0
122      DBX Advisors LLC                                                     Wilmington                 Financial Institution              100.0
123      DEBEKO Immobilien GmbH & Co Grundbesitz OHG                          Eschborn               2   Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
124      DEE Deutsche Erneuerbare Energien GmbH                               Frankfurt                  Financial Institution              100.0
125      DEUKONA Versicherungs-Vermittlungs-GmbH                              Frankfurt                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
126      Deutsche (Aotearoa) Capital Holdings New Zealand                     Auckland                   Financial Institution              100.0
127      Deutsche (Aotearoa) Foreign Investments New Zealand                  Auckland                   Financial Institution              100.0
128      Deutsche (New Munster) Holdings New Zealand Limited                  Auckland                   Financial Institution              100.0



                                                                                                                                           336
Deutsche Bank                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                      44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                      Share
                                                                                                                                          of
Serial                                                                       Domicile of    Foot-                                    Capital
No.      Name of company                                                     company         note   Nature of activity                 in %
129      Deutsche Access Investments Limited                                 Sydney                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
130      Deutsche Aeolia Power Production Société Anonyme                    Athens                 Other Enterprise                    95.6
131      Deutsche Alternative Asset Management (UK) Limited                  London                 Asset Management Company           100.0
132      Deutsche Asia Pacific Holdings Pte Ltd                              Singapore              Financial Holding Company          100.0
133      Deutsche Asset Management (India) Private Limited                   Mumbai                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
134      Deutsche Australia Limited                                          Sydney                 Financial Institution              100.0
135      Deutsche Bank (Cayman) Limited                                      George Town            Other Enterprise                   100.0
136      Deutsche Bank (China) Co., Ltd.                                     Beijing                Credit Institution                 100.0
137      Deutsche Bank (Malaysia) Berhad                                     Kuala Lumpur           Credit Institution                 100.0
138      Deutsche Bank (Suisse) SA                                           Geneva                 Credit Institution                 100.0
139      Deutsche Bank (Uruguay) Sociedad Anónima Institución                Montevideo             Credit Institution                 100.0
         Financiera Externa
140      DEUTSCHE BANK A.S.                                                  Istanbul               Credit Institution                 100.0
141      Deutsche Bank Americas Holding Corp.                                Wilmington             Financial Holding Company          100.0
142      Deutsche Bank Europe GmbH                                           Frankfurt              Credit Institution                 100.0
143      Deutsche Bank Financial Company                                     George Town            Financial Institution              100.0
144      Deutsche Bank Holdings, Inc.                                        Wilmington             Financial Institution              100.0
145      Deutsche Bank Insurance Agency Incorporated                         Wilmington             Other Enterprise                   100.0
146      Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A.                                       Luxembourg             Credit Institution                 100.0
147      Deutsche Bank Mutui S.p.A.                                          Milan                  Credit Institution                 100.0
148      Deutsche Bank México, S.A., Institución de Banca Múltiple           Mexico City            Credit Institution                 100.0
149      Deutsche Bank National Trust Company                                Los Angeles            Financial Institution              100.0
150      Deutsche Bank Polska Spólka Akcyjna                                 Warsaw                 Credit Institution                 100.0
151      Deutsche Bank Representative Office Nigeria Limited                 Lagos                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
152      Deutsche Bank S.A. - Banco Alemão                                   Sao Paulo              Credit Institution                 100.0
153      Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.                                       Wilmington             Financial Institution              100.0
154      Deutsche Bank Securities Limited                                    Toronto                Financial Institution              100.0
155      Deutsche Bank Società per Azioni                                    Milan                  Credit Institution                  99.9
156      Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas                                New York               Credit Institution                 100.0
157      Deutsche Bank Trust Company Delaware                                Wilmington             Credit Institution                 100.0
158      Deutsche Bank Trust Company, National Association                   New York               Financial Institution              100.0
159      Deutsche Bank Trust Corporation                                     New York               Financial Holding Company          100.0
160      Deutsche Bank, Sociedad Anónima Española                            Madrid                 Credit Institution                 100.0
161      Deutsche Capital Finance (2000) Limited                             George Town            Financial Institution              100.0
162      Deutsche Capital Hong Kong Limited                                  Hong Kong              Financial Institution              100.0
163      Deutsche Capital Markets Australia Limited                          Sydney                 Financial Institution              100.0
164      Deutsche Capital Partners China Limited                             Camana Bay             Financial Institution              100.0
165      Deutsche Cayman Ltd.                                                Camana Bay             Other Enterprise                   100.0
166      Deutsche CIB Centre Private Limited                                 Mumbai                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
167      Deutsche Custody N.V.                                               Amsterdam              Financial Institution              100.0
168      Deutsche Domus New Zealand Limited                                  Auckland               Financial Institution              100.0
169      Deutsche Equities India Private Limited                             Mumbai                 Financial Institution              100.0
170      Deutsche Finance No. 2 Limited                                      George Town            Financial Institution              100.0
171      Deutsche Foras New Zealand Limited                                  Auckland               Financial Institution              100.0
172      Deutsche Gesellschaft für Immobilien-Leasing mit beschränkter       Duesseldorf            Financial Institution              100.0
         Haftung
173      Deutsche Global Markets Limited                                     Tel Aviv               Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
174      Deutsche Group Holdings (SA) Proprietary Limited                    Johannesburg           Financial Institution              100.0
175      Deutsche Group Services Pty Limited                                 Sydney                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
176      Deutsche Grundbesitz Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.              Eschborn               Financial Institution              100.0
177      Deutsche Grundbesitz-Anlagegesellschaft mit beschränkter            Frankfurt              Other Enterprise                    99.8
         Haftung
178      Deutsche Holdings (BTI) Limited (in members' voluntary              London                 Financial Institution              100.0
         liquidation)
179      Deutsche Holdings (Grand Duchy)                                     Luxembourg             Financial Holding Company          100.0
180      Deutsche Holdings (Luxembourg) S.à r.l.                             Luxembourg             Financial Holding Company          100.0
181      Deutsche Holdings Limited                                           London                 Financial Holding Company          100.0
182      Deutsche Holdings No. 2 Limited                                     London                 Financial Institution              100.0
183      Deutsche Holdings No. 3 Limited                                     London                 Financial Institution              100.0
184      Deutsche Holdings No. 4 Limited                                     London                 Financial Institution              100.0
185      Deutsche Immobilien Leasing GmbH                                    Duesseldorf            Financial Institution              100.0
186      Deutsche India Holdings Private Limited                             Mumbai                 Financial Holding Company          100.0
187      Deutsche India Private Limited                                      Mumbai                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
188      Deutsche International Corporate Services (Ireland) Limited         Dublin                 Financial Institution              100.0
189      Deutsche International Corporate Services Limited                   St. Helier             Other Enterprise                   100.0
190      Deutsche International Custodial Services Limited                   St. Helier             Other Enterprise                   100.0
191      Deutsche Investments (Netherlands) N.V.                             Amsterdam              Financial Institution              100.0
192      Deutsche Investments India Private Limited                          Mumbai                 Financial Institution              100.0
193      Deutsche Investor Services Private Limited                          Mumbai                 Other Enterprise                   100.0



                                                                                                                                      337
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                          Share
                                                                                                                                              of
Serial                                                                        Domicile of     Foot-                                      Capital
No.      Name of company                                                      company          note     Nature of activity                 in %
194      Deutsche Knowledge Services Pte. Ltd.                                Singapore                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
195      Deutsche Leasing New York Corp.                                      New York                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
196      Deutsche Mexico Holdings S.à r.l.                                    Luxembourg                Financial Holding Company          100.0
197      Deutsche Morgan Grenfell Group Limited                               London                    Financial Institution              100.0
198      Deutsche Mortgage & Asset Receiving Corporation                      Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
199      Deutsche Nederland N.V.                                              Amsterdam                 Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
200      Deutsche New Zealand Limited                                         Auckland                  Financial Institution              100.0
201      Deutsche Nominees Limited                                            London                    Financial Institution              100.0
202      Deutsche Oppenheim Family Office AG                                  Cologne                   Credit Institution                 100.0
203      Deutsche Overseas Issuance New Zealand Limited                       Auckland                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
204      Deutsche Postbank Finance Center Objekt GmbH                         Schuettringen             Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
205      Deutsche Private Asset Management Limited (in members'               London                    Other Enterprise                   100.0
         voluntary liquidation)
206      Deutsche Securities (India) Private Limited                          New Delhi                 Financial Institution              100.0
207      Deutsche Securities (Proprietary) Limited                            Johannesburg              Financial Institution              100.0
208      Deutsche Securities (SA) (Proprietary) Limited                       Johannesburg              Financial Institution              100.0
209      Deutsche Securities Asia Limited                                     Hong Kong                 Financial Institution              100.0
210      Deutsche Securities Australia Limited                                Sydney                    Financial Institution              100.0
211      Deutsche Securities Inc.                                             Tokyo                     Financial Institution              100.0
212      Deutsche Securities Israel Ltd.                                      Tel Aviv                  Financial Institution              100.0
213      Deutsche Securities Korea Co.                                        Seoul                     Financial Institution              100.0
214      Deutsche Securities Mauritius Limited                                Ebène                     Financial Institution              100.0
215      Deutsche Securities Saudi Arabia (a closed joint stock company)      Riyadh                    Financial Institution              100.0
216      Deutsche Securities, S.A. de C.V., Casa de Bolsa                     Mexico City               Financial Institution              100.0
217      Deutsche Services (CI) Limited                                       St. Helier                Financial Institution              100.0
218      Deutsche Services Polska Sp. z o.o.                                  Warsaw                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
219      Deutsche StiftungsTrust GmbH                                         Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise                   100.0
220      Deutsche Strategic Investment Holdings Yugen Kaisha                  Tokyo                     Financial Institution              100.0
221      Deutsche Trustee Company Limited                                     London                    Other Enterprise                   100.0
222      Deutsche Trustee Services (India) Private Limited                    Mumbai                    Other Enterprise                   100.0
223      Deutsche Trustees Malaysia Berhad                                    Kuala Lumpur              Other Enterprise                   100.0
224      Deutsche Wealth Management S.G.I.I.C., S.A.                          Madrid                    Asset Management Company           100.0
225      Deutsches Institut für Altersvorsorge GmbH                           Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise                    78.0
226      DI Deutsche Immobilien Treuhandgesellschaft mbH                      Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise                   100.0
227      DISCA Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Duesseldorf               Financial Institution              100.0
228      Durian (Luxembourg) S.à r.l.                                         Luxembourg                Other Enterprise                   100.0
229      DWS Alternatives France                                              Paris                     Other Enterprise                   100.0
230      DWS Alternatives Global Limited                                      London                    Asset Management Company           100.0
231      DWS Alternatives GmbH                                                Frankfurt                 Asset Management Company           100.0
232      DWS Asset Management (Korea) Company Limited                         Seoul                     Asset Management Company           100.0
233      DWS Beteiligungs GmbH                                                Frankfurt                 Financial Institution               98.9
234      DWS CH AG                                                            Zurich                    Financial Institution              100.0
235      DWS Distributors, Inc.                                               Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
236      DWS Far Eastern Investments Limited                                  Taipei                    Financial Institution               60.0
237      DWS Group GmbH & Co. KGaA                                            Frankfurt               2 Financial Holding Company           79.5
238      DWS Group Services UK Limited                                        London                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
239      DWS Grundbesitz GmbH                                                 Frankfurt                 Asset Management Company            99.9
240      DWS International GmbH                                               Frankfurt                 Investment Firm                    100.0
241      DWS Investment GmbH                                                  Frankfurt                 Asset Management Company           100.0
242      DWS Investment Management Americas, Inc.                             Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
243      DWS Investment S.A.                                                  Luxembourg                Asset Management Company           100.0
244      DWS Investments Australia Limited                                    Sydney                    Financial Institution              100.0
245      DWS Investments Hong Kong Limited                                    Hong Kong                 Financial Institution              100.0
246      DWS Investments Japan Limited                                        Tokyo                     Financial Institution              100.0
247      DWS Investments Shanghai Limited                                     Shanghai                  Financial Institution              100.0
248      DWS Investments Singapore Limited                                    Singapore                 Financial Institution              100.0
249      DWS Investments UK Limited                                           London                    Asset Management Company           100.0
250      DWS Management GmbH                                                  Frankfurt                 Financial Institution              100.0
251      DWS Real Estate GmbH                                                 Frankfurt                 Financial Institution               99.9
252      DWS Service Company                                                  Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
253      DWS Shanghai Private Equity Fund Management Limited                  Shanghai                  Financial Institution              100.0
254      DWS Trust Company                                                    Concord                   Financial Institution              100.0
255      DWS USA Corporation                                                  Wilmington                Financial Holding Company          100.0
256      EC EUROPA IMMOBILIEN FONDS NR. 3 GmbH & CO. KG i.I.                  Hamburg                   Other Enterprise                    65.2
257      Elizabethan Holdings Limited                                         George Town               Financial Institution              100.0
258      Elizabethan Management Limited                                       George Town               Other Enterprise                   100.0
259      European Value Added I (Alternate G.P.) LLP                          London                    Financial Institution              100.0
260      Fiduciaria Sant' Andrea S.r.l.                                       Milan                     Other Enterprise                   100.0
261      Finanzberatungsgesellschaft mbH der Deutschen Bank                   Berlin                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0



                                                                                                                                          338
Deutsche Bank                                              Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                         44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                          Share
                                                                                                                                              of
Serial                                                                          Domicile of   Foot-                                      Capital
No.      Name of company                                                        company        note     Nature of activity                 in %
262      Franz Urbig- und Oscar Schlitter-Stiftung Gesellschaft mit             Frankfurt               Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         beschränkter Haftung
263      Fünfte SAB Treuhand und Verwaltung GmbH & Co. Suhl                     Bad Homburg             Other Enterprise                    74.9
         "Rimbachzentrum" KG
264      G Finance Holding Corp.                                         Wilmington                     Financial Institution              100.0
265      German American Capital Corporation                             Lutherville-                   Financial Institution              100.0
                                                                         Timonium
266      Greenwood Properties Corp.                                      New York                  1    Financial Institution                0.0
267      Grundstücksgesellschaft Frankfurt Bockenheimer Landstraße GbR Troisdorf                   2    Other Enterprise                    96.6
268      Grundstücksgesellschaft Kerpen-Sindorf Vogelrutherfeld GbR      Troisdorf              1, 2    Other Enterprise                    44.0
269      Grundstücksgesellschaft Köln Oppenheimstraße GbR                Troisdorf                 2    Ancillary Services Undertaking      68.8
270      Grundstücksgesellschaft Wiesbaden Luisenstraße/Kirchgasse       Troisdorf                 2    Other Enterprise                    71.2
         GbR
271      Immobilienfonds Büro-Center Erfurt am Flughafen Bindersleben I Troisdorf                     2 Other Enterprise                    65.0
         GbR
272      Immobilienfonds Büro-Center Erfurt am Flughafen Bindersleben II Troisdorf                    2 Other Enterprise                    99.0
         GbR
273      Immobilienfonds Wohn- und Geschäftshaus Köln-Blumenberg V       Troisdorf                    2 Other Enterprise                    59.5
         GbR
274      ISTRON Beteiligungs- und Verwaltungs-GmbH                       Cologne                        Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
275      IVAF I Manager, S.à r.l.                                        Luxembourg                     Financial Institution              100.0
276      J R Nominees (Pty) Ltd                                          Johannesburg                   Other Enterprise                   100.0
277      Joint Stock Company Deutsche Bank DBU                           Kiev                           Credit Institution                 100.0
278      Jyogashima Godo Kaisha                                          Tokyo                          Financial Institution              100.0
279      KEBA Gesellschaft für interne Services mbH                      Frankfurt                      Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
280      Kidson Pte Ltd                                                  Singapore                      Financial Institution              100.0
281      Konsul Inkasso GmbH                                             Essen                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
282      LA Water Holdings Limited                                       George Town                    Financial Institution               75.0
283      LAWL Pte. Ltd.                                                  Singapore                      Financial Institution              100.0
284      Leasing Verwaltungsgesellschaft Waltersdorf mbH                 Schoenefeld                    Financial Institution              100.0
285      Leonardo III Initial GP Limited                                 London                         Financial Institution              100.0
286      Maher Terminals Holdings (Toronto) Limited                      Vancouver                      Financial Institution              100.0
287      MEF I Manager, S. à r.l.                                        Luxembourg                     Financial Institution              100.0
288      MIT Holdings, Inc.                                              Baltimore                      Financial Institution              100.0
289      MortgageIT Securities Corp.                                     Wilmington                     Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
290      MortgageIT, Inc.                                                New York                       Financial Institution              100.0
291      norisbank GmbH                                                  Bonn                           Credit Institution                 100.0
292      OOO "Deutsche Bank TechCentre"                                  Moscow                         Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
293      OOO "Deutsche Bank"                                             Moscow                         Credit Institution                 100.0
294      OPB Verwaltungs- und Treuhand GmbH                              Cologne                        Financial Institution              100.0
295      OPB-Oktava GmbH                                                 Cologne                        Financial Institution              100.0
296      OPB-Quarta GmbH                                                 Cologne                        Financial Institution              100.0
297      OPPENHEIM Capital Advisory GmbH                                 Cologne                        Financial Institution              100.0
298      OPPENHEIM PRIVATE EQUITY Manager GmbH                           Cologne                        Financial Institution              100.0
299      OPPENHEIM PRIVATE EQUITY Verwaltungsgesellschaft mbH            Cologne                        Financial Institution              100.0
300      PADUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                   Duesseldorf                    Financial Institution              100.0
301      Pan Australian Nominees Pty Ltd                                 Sydney                         Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
302      PB Factoring GmbH                                               Bonn                           Financial Institution              100.0
303      PB Spezial-Investmentaktiengesellschaft mit                     Bonn                           Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         Teilgesellschaftsvermögen
304      PCC Services GmbH der Deutschen Bank                            Essen                          Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
305      Plantation Bay, Inc.                                            St. Thomas                     Other Enterprise                   100.0
306      Postbank Akademie und Service GmbH                              Hameln                         Other Enterprise                   100.0
307      Postbank Beteiligungen GmbH                                     Bonn                           Financial Institution              100.0
308      Postbank Direkt GmbH                                            Bonn                           Financial Institution              100.0
309      Postbank Filialvertrieb AG                                      Bonn                           Financial Institution              100.0
310      Postbank Finanzberatung AG                                      Hameln                         Other Enterprise                   100.0
311      Postbank Immobilien GmbH                                        Hameln                         Other Enterprise                   100.0
312      Postbank Leasing GmbH                                           Bonn                           Financial Institution              100.0
313      PT Deutsche Sekuritas Indonesia                                 Jakarta                        Financial Institution               99.0
314      R.B.M. Nominees Pty Ltd                                         Sydney                         Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
315      RoPro U.S. Holding, Inc.                                        Wilmington                     Financial Institution              100.0
316      Route 28 Receivables, LLC                                       Wilmington                     Financial Institution              100.0
317      RREEF America L.L.C.                                            Wilmington                     Financial Institution              100.0
318      RREEF China REIT Management Limited                             Hong Kong                      Other Enterprise                   100.0
319      RREEF European Value Added I (G.P.) Limited                     London                         Financial Institution              100.0
320      RREEF Fund Holding Co.                                          George Town                    Financial Institution              100.0
321      RREEF India Advisors Private Limited                            Mumbai                         Other Enterprise                   100.0
322      RREEF Management L.L.C.                                         Wilmington                     Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0



                                                                                                                                          339
Deutsche Bank                                         Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                    44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                          Share
                                                                                                                              of
Serial                                                                     Domicile of   Foot-                           Capital
No.      Name of company                                                   company        note   Nature of activity        in %
323      SAB Real Estate Verwaltungs GmbH                                  Hameln                Financial Institution     100.0
324      SAGITA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                    Duesseldorf           Financial Institution     100.0
325      Sal. Oppenheim jr. & Cie. Beteiligungs GmbH                       Cologne               Financial Institution     100.0
326      SAPIO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                     Duesseldorf           Financial Institution     100.0
327      Sharps SP I LLC                                                   Wilmington            Financial Institution     100.0
328      Stelvio Immobiliare S.r.l.                                        Bolzano               Other Enterprise          100.0
329      Süddeutsche Vermögensverwaltung Gesellschaft mit beschränkter     Frankfurt             Financial Institution     100.0
         Haftung
330      TELO Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                 Schoenefeld           Financial Institution     100.0
331      Tempurrite Leasing Limited                                        London                Financial Institution     100.0
332      Thai Asset Enforcement and Recovery Asset Management              Bangkok               Financial Institution     100.0
         Company Limited
333      Treuinvest Service GmbH                                           Frankfurt             Other Enterprise          100.0
334      Triplereason Limited                                              London                Financial Institution     100.0
335      VÖB-ZVD Processing GmbH                                           Bonn                  Payment Institution       100.0
336      Wealthspur Investment Ltd.                                        Labuan                Financial Institution     100.0
337      WEPLA Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                Frankfurt             Financial Institution     100.0
338      World Trading (Delaware) Inc.                                     Wilmington            Financial Institution     100.0




                                                                                                                          340
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       44 – Shareholdings




Consolidated structured entities
                                                                                                                                          Share
                                                                                                                                              of
Serial                                                                        Domicile of   Foot-                                        Capital
No.      Name of company                                                      company        note       Nature of activity                 in %
339      Alguer Inversiones Designated Activity Company                       Dublin                    Ancillary Services Undertaking
340      Alixville Invest, S.L.                                               Madrid                    Other Enterprise
341      Altersvorsorge Fonds Hamburg Alter Wall Dr. Juncker KG               Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise
342      Amber Investments S.à r.l.                                           Luxembourg                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
343      Asset Repackaging Trust Five B.V.                                    Amsterdam             4   Other Enterprise
344      Atena SPV S.r.l. in liquidazione                                     Conegliano                Ancillary Services Undertaking      60.0
345      Atlas Investment Company 1 S.à r.l.                                  Luxembourg                Financial Institution
346      Atlas Investment Company 2 S.à r.l.                                  Luxembourg                Financial Institution
347      Atlas Investment Company 3 S.à r.l.                                  Luxembourg                Financial Institution
348      Atlas Investment Company 4 S.à r.l.                                  Luxembourg                Financial Institution
349      Atlas Portfolio Select SPC                                           George Town               Financial Institution                  0.0
350      Atlas SICAV - FIS                                                    Luxembourg            4   Other Enterprise
351      Australian Secured Personal Loans Trust                              Melbourne                 Other Enterprise                   100.0
352      Axia Insurance, Ltd.                                                 Hamilton              4   Other Enterprise
353      Carpathian Investments Designated Activity Company                   Dublin                    Financial Institution              100.0
354      Cathay Capital (Labuan) Company Limited                              Labuan                    Other Enterprise
355      Cathay Capital Company Limited                                       Ebène                     Financial Institution                  9.5
356      Cathay Strategic Investment Company Limited                          Hong Kong                 Financial Institution
357      Cathay Strategic Investment Company No. 2 Limited                    George Town               Financial Institution
358      Cayman Reference Fund Holdings Limited                               George Town               Ancillary Services Undertaking
359      Ceto S.à r.l.                                                        Luxembourg                Financial Institution
360      Charitable Luxembourg Four S.à r.l.                                  Luxembourg                Financial Institution
361      Charitable Luxembourg Three S.à r.l.                                 Luxembourg                Financial Institution
362      Charitable Luxembourg Two S.à r.l.                                   Luxembourg                Financial Institution
363      City Leasing (Thameside) Limited                                     London                    Financial Institution              100.0
364      City Leasing Limited                                                 London                    Financial Institution              100.0
365      CLASS Limited                                                        St. Helier            4   Other Enterprise
366      Collins Capital Low Volatility Performance II Special Investments,   Road Town                 Financial Institution
         Ltd.
367      Crofton Invest, S.L.                                                 Madrid                    Other Enterprise
368      Danube Properties S.à r.l., en faillite                              Luxembourg                Other Enterprise                    25.0
369      Dariconic Designated Activity Company                                Dublin                    Ancillary Services Undertaking
370      DB Asset Finance I S.à r.l.                                          Luxembourg                Financial Institution               95.0
371      DB Asset Finance II S.à r.l.                                         Luxembourg                Financial Institution               95.0
372      DB Aster II, LLC                                                     Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
373      DB Aster III, LLC                                                    Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
374      DB Aster, Inc.                                                       Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
375      DB Aster, LLC                                                        Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
376      DB Covered Bond S.r.l.                                               Conegliano                Financial Institution               90.0
377      DB Credit Investments S.à r.l.                                       Luxembourg                Financial Institution              100.0
378      DB Finance International GmbH                                        Frankfurt                 Financial Institution              100.0
379      DB Holding Fundo de Investimento Multimercado Investimento no        Sao Paulo                 Financial Institution              100.0
         Exterior Crédito Privado
380      DB Immobilienfonds 1 Wieland KG                                      Frankfurt               Other Enterprise
381      DB Immobilienfonds 2 KG i.L.                                         Frankfurt               Financial Institution                 74.0
382      DB Impact Investment (GP) Limited                                    London                  Financial Institution                100.0
383      DB Litigation Fee LLC                                                Wilmington              Financial Institution                100.0
384      DB Municipal Holdings LLC                                            Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking       100.0
385      db PBC                                                               Luxembourg            4 Other Enterprise
386      DB RC Holdings, LLC                                                  Wilmington              Financial Institution                100.0
387      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DB-8074 Trust                               Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
388      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DB-8075 Trust                               Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.1
389      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DB-8076 Trust                               Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
390      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DB-8077 Trust                               Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
391      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DB-8080 Trust                               Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
392      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8052 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
393      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8054 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
394      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8055 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
395      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8056 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
396      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8057 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
397      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8059 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
398      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8060 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
399      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8061 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
400      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8062 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
401      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8063 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0
402      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8064 Trust                              Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking         0.0



                                                                                                                                         341
Deutsche Bank                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                      44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                         Share
                                                                                                                                             of
Serial                                                                       Domicile of   Foot-                                        Capital
No.      Name of company                                                     company        note       Nature of activity                 in %
403      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8065 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
404      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8066 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
405      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8067 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
406      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8068 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
407      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8069 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
408      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8070 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
409      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8071 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
410      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8073 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
411      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8081 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
412      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8082 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
413      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8083 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
414      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8084 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.5
415      DB SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8901 Trust                             Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       5.0
416      DB Structured Holdings Luxembourg S.à r.l.                          Luxembourg                Financial Institution              100.0
417      DBRE Global Real Estate Management US IB, L.L.C.                    Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
418      DBX ETF Trust                                                       Wilmington            4   Other Enterprise
419      De Heng Asset Management Company Limited                            Beijing                   Financial Institution
420      Deloraine Spain, S.L.                                               Madrid                    Ancillary Services Undertaking
421      Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A. - Fiduciary Deposits                  Luxembourg            4   Other Enterprise
422      Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A. - Fiduciary Note Programme            Luxembourg            4   Other Enterprise
423      Deutsche Bank SPEARs/LIFERs, Series DBE-8011 Trust                  Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
424      Deutsche Colombia S.A.S.                                            Bogotá                    Financial Institution              100.0
425      Deutsche Postbank Funding LLC I                                     Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
426      Deutsche Postbank Funding LLC II                                    Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
427      Deutsche Postbank Funding LLC III                                   Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
428      Deutsche Postbank Funding Trust I                                   Wilmington            1   Financial Institution                0.0
429      Deutsche Postbank Funding Trust II                                  Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
430      Deutsche Postbank Funding Trust III                                 Wilmington            1   Financial Institution                0.0
431      DWS Access S.A.                                                     Luxembourg            4   Other Enterprise
432      DWS Alternatives (IE) ICAV                                          Dublin                    Other Enterprise
433      DWS Funds                                                           Luxembourg            4   Other Enterprise
434      DWS Garant                                                          Luxembourg            4   Other Enterprise
435      DWS Invest (IE) ICAV                                                Dublin                    Other Enterprise
436      DWS Noor Islamic Funds Public Limited Company (in liquidation)      Dublin                    Other Enterprise                   100.0
437      DWS Zeitwert Protect                                                Luxembourg                Other Enterprise
438      DWS-Fonds Treasury Liquidity (EUR)                                  Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise                   100.0
439      Dynamic Infrastructure Securities Fund LP                           Wilmington                Financial Institution
440      Earls Four Limited                                                  George Town           4   Other Enterprise
441      EARLS Trading Limited                                               George Town               Financial Institution
442      Einkaufszentrum "HVD Dresden" S.à.r.l & Co. KG i.I.                 Cologne                   Other Enterprise
443      Eirles Three Designated Activity Company                            Dublin                4   Other Enterprise
444      Eirles Two Designated Activity Company                              Dublin                4   Other Enterprise
445      Emerald Asset Repackaging Designated Activity Company               Dublin                    Financial Institution              100.0
446      Emerging Markets Capital Protected Investments Limited              George Town           4   Other Enterprise
447      Emeris                                                              George Town               Financial Institution
448      Encina Property Finance Designated Activity Company                 Dublin                    Financial Institution
449      Epicuro SPV S.r.l.                                                  Conegliano                Ancillary Services Undertaking
450      Erste Frankfurter Hoist GmbH                                        Frankfurt                 Financial Institution              100.0
451      Fondo Privado de Titulizacion Activos Reales 1 B.V.                 Amsterdam                 Other Enterprise
452      Fondo Privado de Titulización PYMES I Designated Activity           Dublin                    Ancillary Services Undertaking
         Company
453      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         037
454      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         039
455      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         040
456      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         041
457      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         043
458      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         044
459      Freddie Mac Class A Taxable Multifamily M Certificates Series M-    McLean                    Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
         047
460      G.O. IB-US Management, L.L.C.                                       Wilmington                Financial Institution              100.0
461      GAC-HEL, Inc.                                                       Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
462      Galene S.à r.l.                                                     Luxembourg                Other Enterprise
463      Gladyr Spain, S.L.                                                  Madrid                    Ancillary Services Undertaking



                                                                                                                                        342
Deutsche Bank                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                     44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                          Share
                                                                                                                                              of
Serial                                                                      Domicile of     Foot-                                        Capital
No.      Name of company                                                    company          note       Nature of activity                 in %
464      Global Opportunities Co-Investment Feeder, LLC                     Wilmington                  Financial Institution
465      Global Opportunities Co-Investment, LLC                            George Town                 Financial Institution
466      Groton Invest, S.L.                                                Madrid                      Financial Institution
467      GWC-GAC Corp.                                                      Wilmington                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
468      Hamildak Designated Activity Company                               Dublin                      Ancillary Services Undertaking
469      Havbell Designated Activity Company                                Dublin                      Ancillary Services Undertaking
470      Histria Inversiones Designated Activity Company                    Dublin                      Financial Institution
471      Iberia Inversiones Designated Activity Company (in liquidation)    Dublin                      Other Enterprise
472      Iberia Inversiones II Designated Activity Company                  Dublin                      Ancillary Services Undertaking
473      Infrastructure Debt Fund S.C.Sp. SICAV-RAIF                        Luxembourg                  Other Enterprise
474      Infrastructure Holdings (Cayman) SPC                               George Town                 Financial Institution
475      Inn Properties S.à r.l., en faillite                               Luxembourg                  Other Enterprise                    25.0
476      Investor Solutions Limited                                         St. Helier              4   Other Enterprise
477      Isar Properties S.à r.l., en faillite                              Luxembourg                  Other Enterprise                    25.0
478      IVAF (Jersey) Limited                                              St. Helier                  Ancillary Services Undertaking
479      Kelona Invest, S.L.                                                Madrid                      Other Enterprise
480      Kelsey Street LLC                                                  Wilmington                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
481      KH Kitty Hall Holdings Limited                                     Galway                      Financial Institution
482      Kratus Inversiones Designated Activity Company                     Dublin                      Financial Institution
483      Ledyard, S.L.                                                      Madrid                      Other Enterprise
484      87 Leonard Development LLC                                         Wilmington                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
485      Leonardo Charitable 1 Limited                                      George Town                 Ancillary Services Undertaking
486      Lerma Investments 2018, Sociedad Limitada                          Madrid                      Financial Institution
487      Life Mortgage S.r.l.                                               Conegliano                  Ancillary Services Undertaking
488      Lindsell Finance Limited                                           St. Julian's                Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
489      Lockwood Invest, S.L.                                              Madrid                      Financial Institution
490      London Industrial Leasing Limited                                  London                      Financial Institution              100.0
491      Lunashadow Limited                                                 Dublin                      Financial Institution
492      2755 LVB I LLC                                                     Wilmington                  Other Enterprise                   100.0
493      Malabo Holdings Designated Activity Company                        Dublin                      Financial Institution
494      Merlin XI                                                          George Town                 Financial Institution
495      Meseta Inversiones Designated Activity Company                     Dublin                      Ancillary Services Undertaking
496      Micro-E Finance S.r.l. in liquidazione                             Rome                        Ancillary Services Undertaking
497      Motion Picture Productions One GmbH & Co. KG                       Frankfurt               2   Financial Institution              100.0
498      MPP Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Frankfurt                   Financial Institution              100.0
499      Navegator - SGFTC, S.A.                                            Lisbon                      Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
500      NCW Holding Inc.                                                   Vancouver                   Financial Institution              100.0
501      New 87 Leonard, LLC                                                Wilmington                  Financial Institution              100.0
502      Oasis Securitisation S.r.l.                                        Conegliano              1   Ancillary Services Undertaking       0.0
503      Oder Properties S.à r.l., en faillite                              Luxembourg                  Other Enterprise                    25.0
504      OPAL, en liquidation volontaire                                    Luxembourg              4   Other Enterprise
505      Opus Niestandaryzowany Sekurytyzacyjny Fundusz Inwestycyjny        Warsaw                      Ancillary Services Undertaking
         Zamkniety
506      OTTAM Mexican Capital Trust Designated Activity Company            Dublin                  4 Other Enterprise
507      Palladium Global Investments S.A.                                  Luxembourg              4 Other Enterprise
508      Palladium Securities 1 S.A.                                        Luxembourg              4 Other Enterprise
509      PanAsia Funds Investments Ltd.                                     George Town             4 Financial Institution
510      PARTS Funding, LLC                                                 Wilmington                Financial Institution                100.0
511      PEIF II SLP Feeder, L.P.                                           Edinburgh                 Financial Institution                  0.7
512      PEIF III SLP Feeder GP, S.à r.l.                                   Senningerberg             Financial Institution
513      PEIF III SLP Feeder, SCSp                                          Senningerberg           2 Other Enterprise                      55.1
514      Peruda Leasing Limited                                             London                    Financial Institution                100.0
515      PERUS 1 S.à r.l., en liquidation volontaire                        Luxembourg                Financial Institution
516      PES Carry and Employee Co-Investment Feeder SCSp                   Luxembourg                Financial Institution                    1.1
517      PES Carry and Employee Co-Investment GP S.à r.l.                   Luxembourg                Financial Institution
518      Philippine Opportunities for Growth and Income (SPV-AMC), INC.     Makati City               Financial Institution                 95.0
519      Property Debt Fund S.C.Sp. SICAV-RAIF                              Luxembourg                Other Enterprise
520      QR Tower 2, LLC                                                    Wilmington                Ancillary Services Undertaking       100.0
521      Quartz No. 1 S.A.                                                  Luxembourg                Ancillary Services Undertaking
522      Radical Properties Unlimited Company                               Dublin                    Financial Institution
523      Reference Capital Investments Limited (in members' voluntary       London                    Financial Institution                100.0
         liquidation)
524      REO Properties Corporation II                                      Wilmington              1 Ancillary Services Undertaking           0.0
525      Residential Mortgage Funding Trust                                 Toronto                   Financial Institution
526      Rhine Properties S.à r.l., en faillite                             Luxembourg                Other Enterprise                      25.0
527      Riviera Real Estate                                                Paris                     Other Enterprise                     100.0
528      ROCKY 2021-1 SPV S.r.l.                                            Conegliano                Ancillary Services Undertaking
529      Romareda Holdings Designated Activity Company                      Dublin                    Financial Institution
530      RREEF DCH, L.L.C.                                                  Wilmington                Financial Institution                100.0



                                                                                                                                         343
Deutsche Bank                                         Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                    44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                     Share
                                                                                                                                         of
Serial                                                                     Domicile of   Foot-                                      Capital
No.      Name of company                                                   company        note     Nature of activity                 in %
531      Samburg Invest, S.L.                                              Madrid                  Other Enterprise
532      Sanne Trust Company Limited Japan (Trust Account Project          Tokyo                   Other Enterprise
         Narita 7303)
533      SCB Alpspitze UG (haftungsbeschränkt)                             Frankfurt               Financial Institution
534      Seaconview Designated Activity Company                            Dublin                  Ancillary Services Undertaking
535      Singer Island Tower Suite LLC                                     Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
536      SOLIDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.               Duesseldorf             Financial Institution              100.0
537      Somkid Immobiliare S.r.l.                                         Conegliano              Other Enterprise                   100.0
538      SP Mortgage Trust                                                 Wilmington              Other Enterprise                   100.0
539      SPV I Sociedad Anónima Cerrada                                    Lima                    Financial Institution               99.9
540      SPV II Sociedad Anónima Cerrada                                   Lima                    Ancillary Services Undertaking      99.8
541      Style City Limited                                                Dublin                  Financial Institution
542      Swabia 1 Designated Activity Company                              Dublin                  Ancillary Services Undertaking
543      Swabia 1. Vermögensbesitz-GmbH                                    Frankfurt               Financial Institution              100.0
544      Tagus - Sociedade de Titularização de Creditos, S.A.              Lisbon                  Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0
545      Tasman NZ Residential Mortgage Trust                              Auckland                Other Enterprise
546      Tender Option Bond Series 2019-BAML3502AB Trust                   Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking      15.0
547      Tender Option Bond Series 2019-BAML3503AB Trust                   Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking      15.0
548      Trave Properties S.à r.l., en faillite                            Luxembourg              Other Enterprise                    25.0
549      TRS Aria LLC                                                      Wilmington              Financial Institution              100.0
550      TRS Leda LLC                                                      Wilmington              Financial Institution              100.0
551      TRS Oak II LTD                                                    George Town             Financial Institution              100.0
552      TRS Scorpio LLC                                                   Wilmington              Financial Institution              100.0
553      TRS SVCO LLC                                                      Wilmington              Financial Institution              100.0
554      TRS Venor LLC                                                     Wilmington              Financial Institution              100.0
555      VCJ Lease S.à r.l.                                                Luxembourg              Other Enterprise                   100.0
556      Vermögensfondmandat Flexible (80 % teilgeschützt)                 Luxembourg              Other Enterprise
557      Waltzfire Limited                                                 Dublin                  Financial Institution
558      Wedverville Spain, S.L.                                           Madrid                  Other Enterprise
559      Wendelstein 2017-1 UG (haftungsbeschränkt)                        Frankfurt               Ancillary Services Undertaking
560      5353 WHMR LLC                                                     Wilmington              Other Enterprise                   100.0
561      Xtrackers (IE) Public Limited Company                             Dublin                4 Other Enterprise                     0.0
562      Xtrackers ETC Public Limited Company                              Dublin                  Other Enterprise
563      Zumirez Drive LLC                                                 Wilmington              Ancillary Services Undertaking     100.0




                                                                                                                                    344
Deutsche Bank                                            Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                       44 – Shareholdings




Companies accounted for at equity
                                                                                                                                   Share
                                                                                                                                       of
Serial                                                                        Domicile of   Foot-                                 Capital
No.      Name of company                                                      company        note       Nature of activity          in %
564      A.C.N. 603 303 126 Pty Ltd                                           Melbourne                 Financial Institution        19.4
565      AKA Ausfuhrkredit-Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung              Frankfurt                 Credit Institution           26.9
566      Arabesque AI Ltd                                                     London                    Financial Institution        24.9
567      BANKPOWER GmbH Personaldienstleistungen                              Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise             30.0
568      Bestra Gesellschaft für Vermögensverwaltung mit beschränkter         Duesseldorf               Financial Institution        49.0
         Haftung
569      Cyber Defence Alliance Limited                                       London          5, 6 Other Enterprise                   0.0
570      DBG Eastern Europe II L.P.                                           St. Helier           Financial Institution             25.9
571      Deutsche Börse Commodities GmbH                                      Eschborn             Other Enterprise                  16.2
572      Deutsche Gulf Finance                                                Riyadh             5 Financial Institution             29.1
573      Deutsche Zurich Pensiones Entidad Gestora de Fondos de               Barcelona            Other Enterprise                  50.0
         Pensiones, S.A.
574      Deutscher Pensionsfonds Aktiengesellschaft                           Cologne                 Other Enterprise               25.1
575      DIL Internationale Leasinggesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf             Financial Institution          50.0
576      Domus Beteiligungsgesellschaft der Privaten Bausparkassen mbH        Berlin                  Financial Holding Company      21.1
577      dwins GmbH                                                           Frankfurt               Other Enterprise               18.7
578      Elbe Properties S.à r.l., en faillite clôturée                       Luxembourg              Other Enterprise               25.0
579      Evroenergeiaki Anonymi Etaireia                                      Athens                5 Other Enterprise               40.0
580      Fünfte SAB Treuhand und Verwaltung GmbH & Co. "Leipzig-              Bad Homburg             Other Enterprise               41.2
         Magdeburg" KG
581      Fünfte SAB Treuhand und Verwaltung GmbH & Co. Dresden                Bad Homburg               Other Enterprise             30.6
         "Louisenstraße" KG
582      G.O. IB-SIV Feeder, L.L.C.                                           Wilmington                Financial Institution        15.7
583      German Public Sector Finance B.V.                                    Amsterdam                 Financial Institution        50.0
584      Gesellschaft für Kreditsicherung mit beschränkter Haftung            Berlin                    Other Enterprise             36.7
585      gixyz Abwicklungs GmbH i.L.                                          Frankfurt                 Other Enterprise             33.3
586      Grundstücksgesellschaft Bürohäuser Köln Rheinhallen GbR              Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             36.6
587      Grundstücksgesellschaft Karlsruhe Kaiserstraße GbR                   Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             22.9
588      Grundstücksgesellschaft Köln-Merheim Winterberger Straße GbR         Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             20.8
589      Grundstücksgesellschaft Leipzig Petersstraße GbR                     Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             49.9
590      Grundstücksgesellschaft Mietwohnhäuser Leipzig-Gohlis GbR            Troisdorf             6   Other Enterprise              0.0
591      Grundstücksgesellschaft München Synagogenplatz GbR                   Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             16.2
592      Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                    Shanghai                  Financial Institution        30.0
593      Huarong Rongde Asset Management Company Limited                      Beijing                   Financial Institution        40.7
594      ILV Immobilien-Leasing Verwaltungsgesellschaft Düsseldorf mbH        Duesseldorf           5   Financial Institution        50.0
595      Immobilienfonds Büro Center Erfurt am Flughafen Bindersleben III     Chemnitz              2   Other Enterprise             11.4
         GbR
596      Immobilienfonds Bürohaus Düsseldorf Grafenberg GbR                   Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             28.5
597      Immobilienfonds Bürohaus Düsseldorf Parsevalstraße GbR               Cologne               2   Other Enterprise             20.5
598      Immobilienfonds Köln-Deutz Arena und Mantelbebauung GbR              Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             21.4
599      Immobilienfonds Köln-Ossendorf II GbR                                Troisdorf             2   Other Enterprise             20.1
600      Ingrid S.à r.l.                                                      Munsbach              5   Other Enterprise             23.8
601      iSwap Limited                                                        London                    Financial Institution        14.0
602      IZI Düsseldorf Informations-Zentrum Immobilien Gesellschaft mit      Duesseldorf               Financial Institution        22.9
         beschränkter Haftung
603      IZI Düsseldorf Informations-Zentrum Immobilien GmbH & Co.            Duesseldorf               Other Enterprise             22.9
         Kommanditgesellschaft
604      Krockow Esch GbR                                                     Troisdorf          6 Other Enterprise                   0.0
605      KVD Singapore Pte. Ltd.                                              Singapore            Financial Institution             25.6
606      Lion Residential Holdings S.à r.l., en liquidation volontaire        Luxembourg           Financial Institution             17.4
607      North Coast Wind Energy Corp.                                        Vancouver       5, 7 Other Enterprise                  96.7
608      P.F.A.B. Passage Frankfurter Allee Betriebsgesellschaft mbH          Berlin               Other Enterprise                  22.2
609      PERILLA Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                 Duesseldorf          Financial Institution             50.0
610      Prestipay S.p.A.                                                     Udine              5 Financial Institution             40.0
611      REDUS DTHG, LLC                                                      Wilmington           Other Enterprise                  49.9
612      Relax Holding S.à r.l.                                               Luxembourg           Other Enterprise                  20.0
613      Robuterra AG in Liquidation                                          Zurich             6 Other Enterprise                   0.0
614      SRC Security Research & Consulting GmbH                              Bonn                 Other Enterprise                  22.5
615      Starpool Finanz GmbH                                                 Berlin               Other Enterprise                  49.9
616      Teesside Gas Transportation Limited (in members' voluntary           London               Other Enterprise                  48.0
         liquidation)
617      Trade Information Network Limited                                    London                5 Other Enterprise               16.7
618      TRAXPAY GmbH                                                         Frankfurt               Other Enterprise                2.4
619      Triton Beteiligungs GmbH i.L.                                        Frankfurt               Other Enterprise               33.1
620      U.S.A. ITCF XCI L.P.                                                 New York              7 Other Enterprise               99.9
621      UKEM Motoryacht Medici Mangusta GbR                                  Troisdorf             6 Other Enterprise                0.0




                                                                                                                                   345
Deutsche Bank                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                      44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                              Share
                                                                                                                                  of
Serial                                                                       Domicile of   Foot-                             Capital
No.      Name of company                                                     company        note     Nature of activity        in %
622      Ullmann Krockow Esch GbR                                            Troisdorf             6 Other Enterprise             0.0
623      Ullmann, Krockow, Esch Luftverkehrsgesellschaft bürgerlichen        Troisdorf             6 Other Enterprise             0.0
         Rechts
624      Volbroker.com Limited                                               London                  Financial Institution      22.5
625      Weser Properties S.à r.l., en faillite clôturée                     Luxembourg              Other Enterprise           25.0
626      WIS JV LLC                                                          Wilmington            5 Other Enterprise           50.0
627      Wood NewCo S.à r.l.                                                 Luxembourg            7 Other Enterprise           52.1
628      zeitinvest-Service GmbH                                             Eschborn                Other Enterprise           25.0
629      Zhong De Securities Co., Ltd                                        Beijing               5 Financial Institution      33.3
630      ZINDUS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                            Duesseldorf             Financial Institution      50.0
631      ZYRUS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                  Schoenefeld             Financial Institution      25.0
632      ZYRUS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Patente I KG i.L.          Schoenefeld             Other Enterprise           20.4




                                                                                                                              346
Deutsche Bank                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                      44 – Shareholdings




Other companies, where the holding exceeds 20 %
                                                                                                                                          Share
                                                                                                                                              of
Serial                                                                              Domicile of      Foot-                               Capital
No.      Name of company                                                            company           note       Nature of activity        in %
633      ABATE Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                              Duesseldorf              8   Financial Institution      50.0
634      ABRI Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                          Duesseldorf              8   Financial Institution      50.0
635      ACHTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                     Duesseldorf              8   Other Enterprise           50.0
636      ACHTUNDZWANZIGSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft             Duesseldorf              8   Other Enterprise           50.0
         mbH i.L.
637      ACHTZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                 Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
638      ACIS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                           Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
639      ACTIO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                               Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
640      ADEO Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                           Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
641      ADLAT Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                          Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
642      ADMANU Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                         Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
643      AGLOM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                     Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
644      AGUM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                           Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
645      ALANUM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                         Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
646      ALMO Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                      Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
647      ALTA Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                           Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
648      ANDOT Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                               Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
649      APUR Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                      Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
650      ATAUT Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                     Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
651      AVOC Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                           Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
652      BAKTU Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                     Schoenefeld          8      Financial Institution      50.0
653      BALIT Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                          Schoenefeld          8      Financial Institution      50.0
654      Banks Island General Partner Inc.                                           Toronto              8      Financial Institution      50.0
655      Benefit Trust GmbH                                                          Luetzen          9, 10      Financial Institution     100.0
656      BIMES Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                          Schoenefeld          8      Financial Institution      50.0
657      BLI Beteiligungsgesellschaft für Leasinginvestitionen mbH                   Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      33.2
658      BLI Internationale Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      32.0
659      DB Advisors SICAV                                                           Luxembourg       9, 11      Other Enterprise           95.3
660      DB Fund (Mauritius) Limited                                                 Ebène                9      Other Enterprise          100.0
                                                                                     CyberCity
661      DB Placement, LLC                                                           Wilmington        7, 9      Other Enterprise          100.0
662      DB RC Investments II, LLC                                                   Wilmington        7, 9      Other Enterprise           99.9
663      DB Real Estate Global Opportunities IB (Offshore), L.P.                     Camana Bay           8      Financial Institution      33.6
664      Deutsche River Investment Management Company S.à r.l., en faillite clôturée Luxembourg           8      Financial Institution      49.0
665      DONARUM Holding GmbH                                                        Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
666      DREIUNDZWANZIGSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft              Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
         mbH i.L.
667      DREIZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                 Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
668      DRITTE Fonds-Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Duesseldorf          8      Financial Institution      50.0
669      DRITTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                     Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
670      DWS Offshore Infrastructure Debt Opportunities Feeder LP                    George Town          8      Financial Institution      26.3
671      EINUNDZWANZIGSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH Duesseldorf                    8      Other Enterprise           50.0
672      Eisler Capital (TA) Ltd                                                     London              12      Other Enterprise           34.7
673      ELC Logistik-Centrum Verwaltungs-GmbH                                       Erfurt               8      Financial Institution      50.0
674      ELFTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                      Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
675      FÜNFTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                     Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
676      FÜNFZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                 Duesseldorf          8      Other Enterprise           50.0
677      Glor Music Production GmbH & Co. KG                                         Rottach-Egern       12      Other Enterprise           29.0
678      GLOR Music Production II GmbH & Co. KG                                      Rottach-Egern       12      Other Enterprise           28.2
679      HR "Simone" GmbH & Co. KG i.I.                                              Jork                12      Other Enterprise           24.3
680      Immobilien-Vermietungsgesellschaft Schumacher GmbH & Co. Objekt             Berlin               8      Financial Institution      20.5
         Rolandufer KG i.L.
681      Intermodal Finance I Ltd.                                                   George Town           8     Other Enterprise           49.0
682      IOG Denali Upton, LLC                                                       Dover               12      Other Enterprise           23.0
683      IOG NOD I, LLC                                                              Dover               12      Other Enterprise           22.5
684      Isaac Newton S.A.                                                           Capellen           7, 9     Other Enterprise           95.0
685      Kinneil Leasing Company                                                     London                8     Financial Institution      35.0
686      KOMPASS 3 Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                 Duesseldorf           8     Financial Institution      50.0
687      M Cap Finance Mittelstandsfonds GmbH & Co. KG                               Frankfurt        7, 12,     Financial Institution      77.1
                                                                                                     13
688      M Cap Finance Mittelstandsfonds III GmbH & Co. KG                          Frankfurt            12      Financial Institution      35.7
689      MCT Südafrika 3 GmbH & Co. KG i.I.                                         Hamburg              12      Other Enterprise           37.9
690      Metro plus Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                    Duesseldorf            8     Financial Institution      40.0
691      MT "CAPE BEALE" Tankschiffahrts GmbH & Co. KG i.I.                         Hamburg              12      Other Enterprise           34.0
692      MT "KING DANIEL" Tankschiffahrts UG (haftungsbeschränkt) & Co. KG i.L.     Hamburg              12      Other Enterprise           32.8
693      MT "KING DOUGLAS" Tankschiffahrts UG (haftungsbeschränkt) & Co. KG         Hamburg              12      Other Enterprise           33.0



                                                                                                                                          347
Deutsche Bank                                       Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                  44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                  Share
                                                                                                                                      of
Serial                                                                         Domicile of   Foot-                               Capital
No.      Name of company                                                       company        note       Nature of activity        in %
         i.L.
694      MT "KING EDWARD" Tankschiffahrts GmbH & Co. KG                        Hamburg           12      Other Enterprise           35.3
695      MT "KING ERIC" Tankschiffahrts GmbH & Co. KG i.I.                     Hamburg           12      Other Enterprise           34.5
696      NBG Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
697      NEUNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH               Duesseldorf         8     Other Enterprise           50.0
698      NEUNZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH           Duesseldorf         8     Other Enterprise           50.0
699      Nexus Infrastruktur Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                      Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
700      NOFA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
701      OPPENHEIM Buy Out GmbH & Co. KG i.L.                                  Cologne       1, 2, 8     Financial Institution      27.7
702      PADEM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
703      PAGUS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                               Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
704      PALDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
705      PANTUR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                   Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
706      PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                      Duesseldorf         8     Other Enterprise           50.0
707      PEDIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                    Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
708      PEDUM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                               Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
709      PENDIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
710      PENTUM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
711      PERGOS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                              Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
712      PERGUM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
713      PERLIT Mobilien-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
714      PERLU Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
715      PERNIO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
716      PERXIS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
717      PETA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
718      PONTUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
719      PRADUM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
720      PRASEM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                   Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
721      PRATES Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                   Schoenefeld         8     Financial Institution      50.0
722      PRISON Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Schoenefeld         8     Financial Institution      50.0
723      Private Equity Invest Beteiligungs GmbH                               Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
724      Private Equity Life Sciences Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH             Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
725      PUDU Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
726      PURIM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
727      QUANTIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                       Schoenefeld         8     Financial Institution      50.0
728      QUELLUM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                       Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
729      QUOTAS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
730      SABIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
731      SALIX Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
732      SALUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf         8     Financial Institution      50.0
733      SALUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Objekt Dresden    Duesseldorf         9     Financial Institution      58.5
         KG i.L.
734      SANCTOR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                       Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
735      SANDIX Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
736      SANO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                     Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
737      SARIO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
738      SATINA Mobilien-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                      Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
739      SCANDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
740      Schumacher Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                               Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      33.2
741      SCITOR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
742      SCITOR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Objekt           Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution      71.1
         Heiligenstadt KG i.L.
743      SCUDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                    Duesseldorf        9      Financial Institution     100.0
744      SECHSTE Fonds-Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
745      SECHSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH              Duesseldorf        8      Other Enterprise           50.0
746      SECHZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH           Duesseldorf        8      Other Enterprise           50.0
747      SEDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                     Duesseldorf        9      Financial Institution     100.0
748      SEGES Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
749      SEGU Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
750      SELEKTA Grundstücksverwaltungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
751      SENA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
752      SENA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Objekt Kamenz KG   Duesseldorf     7, 9      Financial Institution     100.0
753      SERICA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
754      SIDA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
755      SIEBTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH               Duesseldorf        8      Other Enterprise           50.0
756      SIEBZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH           Duesseldorf        8      Other Enterprise           50.0
757      SIFA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Duesseldorf        9      Financial Institution     100.0
758      SILANUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                  Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0
759      SILEX Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                         Duesseldorf        8      Financial Institution      50.0



                                                                                                                                  348
Deutsche Bank                                          Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                     44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                                      Share
                                                                                                                                          of
Serial                                                                             Domicile of   Foot-                               Capital
No.      Name of company                                                           company        note       Nature of activity        in %
760      SILIGO Mobilien-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                          Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
761      SILUR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
762      SIMILA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                       Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
763      SOLATOR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
764      SOLON Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
765      SOLUM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
766      SOMA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                              Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
767      SOREX Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
768      SOSPITA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
769      SPINO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                        Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
770      SPLENDOR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                          Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
771      STAGIRA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
772      STATOR Heizkraftwerk Frankfurt (Oder) Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.   Schoenefeld           9   Financial Institution     100.0
773      SUBLICA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                      Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
774      SUBU Mobilien-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
775      SULPUR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                       Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
776      SUPERA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
777      SUPLION Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                      Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
778      SUSA Mobilien-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
779      SUSIK Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
780      TABA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                              Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
781      TACET Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
782      TAGO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                              Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
783      TAGUS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
784      TAKIR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
785      TEBOR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
786      TEMATIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                      Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
787      TERRUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                       Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
788      TESATUR Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                      Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
789      TESATUR Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Objekt Halle I KG i.L.         Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
790      TESATUR Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Objekt Nordhausen I KG i.L.    Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
791      TIEDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
792      TIEDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. Objekt Lager Nord     Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      25.0
         KG i.L.
793      TOSSA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
794      TRAGO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
795      TREMA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Berlin                8   Financial Institution      50.0
796      TRENTO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
797      TRINTO Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                  Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
798      TRIPLA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           9   Financial Institution     100.0
799      TUDO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                         Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
800      TUGA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                         Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
801      TYRAS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
802      VARIS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                   Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
803      VIERTE Fonds-Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                 Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
804      VIERTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                   Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
805      VIERUNDZWANZIGSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft            Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
         mbH
806      VIERZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH               Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
807      Wohnungs-Verwaltungsgesellschaft Moers mbH i.L.                           Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
808      XARUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                        Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
809      XELLUM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
810      XENTIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
811      XERA Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                              Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
812      ZABATUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
813      ZAKATUR Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                      Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
814      ZALLUS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                  Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
815      ZARAT Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                   Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
816      ZARGUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
817      ZEA Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                                          Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      25.0
818      ZEHNTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                   Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
819      ZELAS Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                                   Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
820      ZENO Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                              Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
821      ZEREVIS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                           Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
822      ZERGUM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
823      ZIDES Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
824      ZIMBEL Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                            Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
825      ZINUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
826      ZIRAS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                             Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0



                                                                                                                                      349
Deutsche Bank                                     Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                44 – Shareholdings




                                                                                                                             Share
                                                                                                                                 of
Serial                                                                    Domicile of   Foot-                               Capital
No.      Name of company                                                  company        note       Nature of activity        in %
827      ZITON Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                    Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
828      ZITUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                    Schoenefeld           8   Financial Institution      50.0
829      ZONTUM Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH                   Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
830      ZORUS Grundstücks-Vermietungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.               Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
831      ZURET Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH i.L.                          Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
832      ZWANZIGSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH      Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
833      ZWEITE Fonds-Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                        Duesseldorf           8   Financial Institution      50.0
834      ZWEITE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH          Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
835      ZWEIUNDZWANZIGSTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft   Duesseldorf           8   Other Enterprise           50.0
         mbH i.L.
836      ZWÖLFTE PAXAS Treuhand- und Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH         Duesseldorf           8 Other Enterprise             50.0
837      ZYLUM Beteiligungsgesellschaft mbH                               Schoenefeld           8 Financial Institution        25.0




                                                                                                                             350
Deutsche Bank                                           Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                      44 – Shareholdings




Holdings in large corporations, where the holding exceeds 5 % of the voting rights
                                                                                                                                    Share
                                                                                                                                        of
Serial                                                                              Domicile of    Foot-                           Capital
No.      Name of company                                                            company         note   Nature of activity        in %
838      ABRAAJ Holdings (in official liquidation)                                  George Town            Financial Institution       8.8
839      BÜRGSCHAFTSBANK BRANDENBURG GmbH                                           Potsdam                Financial Institution       8.5
840      Bürgschaftsbank Mecklenburg-Vorpommern GmbH                                Schwerin               Financial Institution       8.4
841      Bürgschaftsbank Sachsen GmbH                                               Dresden                Financial Institution       6.3
842      Bürgschaftsbank Sachsen-Anhalt GmbH                                        Magdeburg              Financial Institution       8.2
843      Bürgschaftsbank Schleswig-Holstein Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung   Kiel                   Financial Institution       5.6
844      Bürgschaftsbank Thüringen GmbH                                             Erfurt                 Financial Institution       8.7
845      Bürgschaftsgemeinschaft Hamburg GmbH                                       Hamburg                Financial Institution       8.7
846      MTS S.p.A.                                                                 Rome                   Other Enterprise            5.0
847      Prader Bank S.p.A.                                                         Bolzano                Credit Institution          9.0
848      Private Export Funding Corporation                                         Wilmington             Financial Institution       6.0
849      Saarländische Investitionskreditbank Aktiengesellschaft                    Saarbruecken           Credit Institution         11.8
850      Yensai.com Co., Ltd.                                                       Tokyo                  Financial Institution       6.9




                                                                                                                                    351
Deutsche Bank                                    Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                               45 – Impact of Deutsche Bank’s transformation




45 – Impact of Deutsche Bank’s transformation
The information presented in this Note refers to a number of transformational measures relating to the Group’s businesses
and its organization Deutsche Bank announced on July 7, 2019. The immediate and secondary impacts that these measures
had on the Group’s operating results and financial position are disclosed below.


Impairment and amortization of Self-developed software and other related
impacts
In line with the transformation announcement, the Group reviewed current platform software and software under construction
assigned to businesses subject to the transformation strategy. Accordingly, the reassessment of the respective recoverable
amounts led to an impairment of self-developed software of € 131 million and € 36 million for the financial year ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Most of the software impairment of € 131 million is related to the implementation
of cloud computing.

In addition, the Group recorded amortization on software and other related impacts subject to the transformation strategy of
€ 451 million and € 178 million for the financial year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The amortization on
software and other related impacts of € 451 million include € 350 million that is related to the settlement in September 2021
of an IT service contract. The impairment write-down as well as the software amortization are included within the general and
administrative expenses of the Group’s results in 2021 and 2020, respectively.


Impairment of Right of Use assets and other related impacts
The Group recognized impairments, accelerated or higher depreciation of Right-of-Use (RoU) assets, asset write downs and
accelerated depreciation on leasehold improvements and furniture, onerous contracts provisions for non-lease costs,
depreciation of capitalized reinstatement costs and other one-time relocation costs of € 269 million and € 201 million for the
financial year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Certain of these costs related to incremental or accelerated
decisions are driven by the changes in our expected operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic.


Deferred tax asset valuation adjustments
Each quarter, the Group re-evaluates its estimate related to deferred tax assets, including its assumptions about future
profitability. In connection with the transformation the Group adjusted the estimate related to deferred tax assets in affected
jurisdictions, such as the UK and the U.S., and recognized € 0 million and € 37 million of valuation adjustments for the financial
year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.


Restructuring & severance charges
Starting with the announcement of the transformation of Deutsche Bank on July 7, 2019, we designated all restructuring
expenses as related to the transformation announcement and the subsequent business re-organization and perimeter
changes resulting in € 261 million and € 485 million restructuring expenses for the Group for the financial year ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These charges are comprised of termination benefits, additional expenses
covering the acceleration of deferred compensation awards not yet amortized due to the discontinuation of employment and
contract termination costs related to real estate. 1,362 and 1,447 full-time equivalent employees (FTE) were impacted by the
re-organization and changes during the financial year 2021 and 2020, respectively.

In addition to these restructuring expenses, € 209 million and € 203 million of severance related to the transformation
announcement were recorded for the financial year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.


Other transformation related expenses
As a result of the strategic transformation, the Group recognized other transformation related expenses including expenses
for Audit, Accounting & Tax, consulting fees and IT consulting fees of € 152 million and € 75 million for the financial year ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.




                                                                                                                            352
Deutsche Bank                                    Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                               46 – Interest rate benchmark reform




46 – Interest rate benchmark reform
In recent years, transactions in the unsecured short-term financing market, which IBOR interest rate benchmarks seek to
measure, have significantly reduced. As a result, IBOR reform projects were initiated under the leadership of the Financial
Stability Board (FSB) and central bank working groups, to create alternative and robust benchmark interest rates or so-called
risk-free rates (“RFRs”).

Many of the reforms are now effective while others are well progressed. In 2019, EURIBOR was reformed to comply with the
EU financial benchmarks regulation and continues to be available. EONIA ceased to exist from January 3, 2022 and has been
replaced by the “€STR” euro short-term rate €STR. Publication of IBOR settings for all tenors of GBP LIBOR, CHF LIBOR,
EUR LIBOR and JPY LIBOR ceased on January 3, 2022. Three JPY LIBOR and three GBP LIBOR benchmarks will continue
in ‘synthetic’ form for limited periods but are not available for use in new products. For USD LIBOR, publication of settings for
1-week and 2-months USD LIBOR has ended as of December 31, 2021. Five remaining USD LIBOR settings will continue to
be published until the end of June 2023 although they are generally not available for use in new products. A decision about
whether to continue any of the USD LIBOR settings in ‘synthetic’, and thus non-representative, form will be taken closer to
that date.

The following table shows the notional values of financial instruments, external to the Group, which reference IBORs where it
is expected that there will no longer be a requirement to quote IBOR rates. The table includes those financial instruments with
a maturity date that extends past the date when the requirement to submit quotes is expected to end. For the IBOR rates
disclosed below, the maturity date of the financial instruments maturity is after December 31, 2021, except for USD LIBOR
referenced contracts with tenors other than 1-week or 2-months where the date is for those maturing after June 30, 2023.




                                                                                                                           353
Deutsche Bank                                                         Additional Notes
Annual Report 2021                                                    46 – Interest rate benchmark reform




Interest Rate Benchmark (IBOR) Reform
                                                                                                                                                                            2021
in € m.                                USD LIBOR            GBP LIBOR            CHF LIBOR             JPY LIBOR                EONIA          Other IBORs         Multiple basis1
Non-Derivative
Financial assets:
  Bonds (floating rate
  notes)                                      400                     -                    -                     -                    -                   -                      -
  Securitizations                              98                    37                    -                     -                    -                   -                      -
  Syndicated Loans                         35,312                   552                   11                     1                    -                  71                      -
  Repurchase
  agreements / Other
  Secured Lending                              308                     -                    -                    -                    -                    -                     -
  Loans / Advances
  (Total Limit)                            27,091                 4,926                  171                   58                  363                  398                      -
  Retail / Commercial
  Mortgages                                    395                    -                     -                    -                   -                     -                     -
  Other                                        982                   90                     -                    7                 173                     -                     -
Derivative Financial
assets:2
  Interest Rate
  Derivatives – Exchange
  Traded                                   80,264                      -                    -                    -                    -                    -                     -
  Interest Rate
  Derivatives – OTC                    2,546,602               345,222               44,657              521,581                 9,042              40,493                    5
  Other OTC Derivatives                  202,554                 6,080                2,408                1,946                     0                  10              167,045
Total financial assets                 2,894,005               356,907               47,246              523,593                 9,578              40,971              167,050

Non-Derivative
Financial liabilities:
   Bonds (floating rate
   notes)                                   6,561                      -                    -                    -                    -                    -                     -
   Repos / Other Secured
   Lending                                      6                     -                     -                    -                   2                     -                     -
   Deposits                                10,809                     -                     -                    -                 664                     -                     -
   Other                                       26                    41                     -                    -                  22                     -                     -
Derivative Financial
liabilities:2
   Interest Rate
   Derivatives – Exchange
   Traded                                   3,374                      -                    -                    -                    -                    -                     -
   Interest Rate
   Derivatives – OTC                   2,469,906               315,253               44,058              498,993                 7,150              38,569                    2
   Other OTC Derivatives                 196,083                 6,177                1,384                3,578                     0                  81              144,215
Total financial liabilities            2,686,766               321,471               45,442              502,571                 7,840              38,650              144,217

Off-balance sheet:
  Loan Commitments                         73,152                   498                   40                   95                1,954                   33                      -
  Other Commitments                            13                     -                    -                    -                    -                    -                      -
  Other                                         -                     -                    -                    -                    9                    -                      -
Total off-balance sheet                    73,166                   498                   40                   95                1,963                   33                      -
1
    Multiple basis relates to underlying contracts utilizing multiple benchmarks subject to reforms, (e.g. floating- floating interest rate swaps which have cash flows in GBP IBOR
    and USD IBOR).
2
    The Group also has exposure to interest rate benchmark reform in respect of its cash collateral balances across some of its Credit Support Annex agreements. This exposure
    is not presented in the table due to its short term nature.


The table above shows the exposure to legacy IBORs based upon the contractual terms and the reference rate that currently
applies. All the positions referencing GBP LIBOR, CHF LIBOR, JPY LIBOR, EUR LIBOR, EONIA and those USD LIBOR
tenors ceasing in early 2022 have either effective fall back provisions in place which will result in the benchmark rate on these
products changing to an alternative reference rate when the respective IBOR ceases on January 3, 2022, or are expected to
utilize GBP and JPY synthetic IBOR in 2022 as the transition arrangements are finalized. The Group IBOR program is tracking
such contracts that are expected to utilize GBP and JPY synthetic LIBOR in 2022. The notional value of these positions
amounts to approximately € 1.15 billion across a limited number of clients and products, the majority of which are lending
products and the remainder derivatives clients. The majority of these positions is expected to transition to new benchmark
rates during the first quarter of 2022.




                                                                                                                                                                            354
Deutsche Bank                                   Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                              Independent auditor’s report




Confirmations

Independent auditor’s report
To Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main


Report on the audit of the consolidated financial statements and of the group
management report

Opinions
We have audited the consolidated financial statements of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main, and its
subsidiaries (the group), which comprise the consolidated balance sheet as at 31 December 2021, and the consolidated
statement of income, consolidated statement of comprehensive income, consolidated statement of changes in equity and
consolidated statement of cash flows for the fiscal year from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2021, and notes to the
consolidated financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies. In addition, we have audited the
group management report of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main, which is combined with the management
report of the Bank, for the fiscal year from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2021. In accordance with the German legal
requirements, we have not audited the content of the combined Corporate Governance Statement pursuant to Sec. 315d HGB
which is published on the website stated in the group management report and is part of the group management report.

In our opinion, on the basis of the knowledge obtained in the audit,

– the accompanying consolidated financial statements comply, in all material respects, with the IFRSs as adopted by the EU,
  and the additional requirements of German commercial law pursuant to Sec. 315e (1) HGB and, in compliance with these
  requirements, give a true and fair view of the assets, liabilities and financial position of the group as at 31 December 2021
  and of its financial performance for the fiscal year from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2021, and
– the accompanying group management report as a whole provides an appropriate view of the group’s position. In all material
  respects, this group management report is consistent with the consolidated financial statements, complies with German
  legal requirements and appropriately presents the opportunities and risks of future development. Our opinion on the group
  management report does not cover the content of the combined Corporate Governance Statement referred to above.

Pursuant to Sec. 322 (3) Sentence 1 HGB, we declare that our audit has not led to any reservations relating to the legal
compliance of the consolidated financial statements and of the group management report.


Basis for the opinions
We conducted our audit of the consolidated financial statements and of the group management report in accordance with
Sec. 317 HGB and the EU Audit Regulation (No 537/2014, referred to subsequently as "EU Audit Regulation") and in
compliance with German Generally Accepted Standards for Financial Statement Audits promulgated by the Institut der
Wirtschaftsprüfer [Institute of Public Auditors in Germany] (IDW). Our responsibilities under those requirements and principles
are further described in the "Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements and of the group
management report" section of our auditor’s report. We are independent of the group entities in accordance with the
requirements of European law and German commercial and professional law, and we have fulfilled our other German
professional responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. In addition, in accordance with Art. 10 (2) f) of the EU
Audit Regulation, we declare that we have not provided non-audit services prohibited under Art. 5 (1) of the EU Audit
Regulation. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our
opinions on the consolidated financial statements and on the group management report.


Key audit matters in the audit of the consolidated financial statements
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most significance in our audit of the
consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2021. These matters were
addressed in the context of our audit of the consolidated financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon;
we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.

Below, we describe what we consider to be the key audit matters:



                                                                                                                          355
Deutsche Bank                                    Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                               Independent auditor’s report




1. Valuation of level 3 financial instruments and related inputs not quoted in
   active markets

Reasons why the matter was determined to be a key audit matter
Management uses valuation techniques to establish the fair value of level 3 financial instruments and related inputs not quoted
in active markets. The bank held level 3 financial assets and financial liabilities measured at fair value of EUR 25,182 million
and EUR 11,424 million as of December 31, 2021. The relevant financial instruments are reported within financial assets and
liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.

Financial instruments and related inputs that are not quoted in active markets include structured derivatives valued using
complex models; derivatives with non-standard collateral arrangements; more-complex OTC derivatives; distressed debt;
highly-structured bonds; illiquid loans; credit spreads used to determine valuation adjustments (Credit Valuation Adjustment);
and other significant inputs which cannot be observed for instruments with longer-dated maturities.

As the valuation of level 3 financial instruments and related inputs not quoted in active markets is based on a high degree on
management’s assumptions and judgements due to the complex nature of the valuation techniques and models being utilized
and the unobservability of the significant inputs used, this is a key audit matter.


Auditor’s response
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of the controls over
management’s processes to determine fair value of financial instruments and determination of significant unobservable inputs
therein. This includes controls relating to independent price verification; independent validation of valuation models, including
assessment of model limitations; monitoring of valuation model usage; and calculation of fair value adjustments.

We evaluated the valuation techniques, models and methodologies, and tested the significant inputs used in those models.
We performed an independent revaluation of a sample of derivatives and other financial instruments at fair value that are not
quoted in active markets, using independent models and inputs. We also independently assessed the reasonableness of a
sample of proxy inputs used by comparing to market data sources.

In addition, we evaluated the methodology and inputs used by management in determining fair value adjustments against the
requirements of IFRS 13 and performed recalculations for a sample of these valuation adjustments using our own independent
data and methodology.

We involved our financial instruments valuation specialists in the procedures related to valuation models, independent
revaluation and fair value adjustments.

Our procedures did not lead to any reservations relating to the valuation of level 3 financial instruments and related inputs not
quoted in active markets.


Reference to related disclosures
Information on the valuation techniques, models and methodologies used in the measurement of fair value is provided in notes
1 and 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.




                                                                                                                           356
Deutsche Bank                                   Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                              Independent auditor’s report




2. Inclusion of forward-looking information in the model-based calculation of
   expected credit losses

Reasons why the matter was determined to be a key audit matter
As of December 31, 2021, the group recognized an allowance for credit losses of EUR 5,379 million, with EUR 1,216 million
relating to stage 1 and stage 2 allowances.

The estimated probabilities of default (PD) used in the model-based calculation of expected credit losses on non-defaulted
financial instruments (IFRS 9 stage 1 and stage 2) are based on historical information, combined with current economic
developments and forward-looking macroeconomic forecasts (e.g., gross domestic product and unemployment rates).
Statistical techniques are used to transform the base scenario for future macroeconomic developments into multiple scenarios.
These scenarios are the basis for deriving multi-year PD curves for different rating and counterparty classes, which are used
in the calculation of expected credit losses.

Given the economic uncertainties from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related risks to the global economy, the
estimation of forward-looking information requires significant judgement. To reflect these uncertainties, management must
assess whether to make adjustments to its standard process for inclusion of macroeconomic variables into the expected credit
loss model and forecasting methods, either by adjusting the macroeconomic variables or through the inclusion of management
overlays.

In view of the significant holdings of non-defaulted financial instruments and the economic uncertainty and significant use of
judgment, we consider the inclusion of forward-looking information in the model-based calculation of expected credit losses ,
and any adjustments thereof, to be a key audit matter.


Auditor’s response
We obtained an understanding of the processes implemented by management, assessed the design of the controls over the
selection, determination, monitoring and validation of forward-looking information in respect of the requirements under IFRS
9, and tested their operating effectiveness.

We evaluated management’s review of its expected credit loss model and forecasting methods conducted through the model
validation process. Furthermore, we evaluated the methods used to include the selected variables in the baseline scenario
and the derivation of the multiple scenarios.

We assessed the baseline macroeconomic forecasts by comparing them with macroeconomic forecasts published by external
sources.

We also evaluated the methodology applied by management to determine whether to adjust its standard process for inclusion
of macroeconomic variables or to adjust the model results through management overlays. In doing so, we assessed the results
of management’s sensitivity analysis and compared the macroeconomic variables used to our own benchmark analysis. We
also assessed that the adjustments were included in the calculation of expected credit losses according to management’s
methodology.

To assess the inclusion of forward-looking information in the model-based calculation of expected credit losses, we involved
internal credit risk modelling specialists to assist us.

Our procedures did not lead to any reservations relating to the inclusion of forward-looking information in the model-based
calculation of expected credit losses.


Reference to related disclosures
Information on the inclusion of forward-looking information into the model-based calculation of expected credit losses and their
adjustments for stages 1 and 2 is provided in notes 1 and 19 to the notes to the consolidated financial statements.




                                                                                                                          357
Deutsche Bank                                   Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                              Independent auditor’s report




3. Measurement of goodwill for the Asset Management cash-generating unit

Reasons why the matter was determined to be a key audit matter
As of December 31, 2021, the group reported goodwill of EUR 2,806 million that was exclusively allocated to its Asset
Management cash-generating unit (CGU).

For purposes of the impairment test the recoverable amount of the Asset Management CGU is calculated using the discounted
cash flow model. In this context, significant assumptions are made regarding the earnings projections, the discount rate and
the long-term growth rate. The discount rate is derived using the Capital Asset Pricing Model.

As the measurement of goodwill for the Asset Management CGU is based on a high degree of judgment due to the earnings
projections, discount rate and long-term growth rate contained in the discounted cash flow model this is a key audit matter.


Auditor’s response
We obtained an understanding of the process for preparing the earnings projections and calculating the recoverable amount
of goodwill for the Asset Management CGU. In this respect, we also obtained an understanding of management’s controls
regarding the earnings projections, the discount rate and the long-term growth rate, assessed the design of such controls and
tested their operating effectiveness.

We analyzed the significant assumptions described above with a focus on significant changes compared with the prior year.
In this regard, we assessed the consistency and reasonableness of the significant assumptions used in the discounted cash
flow model by comparing them with external market expectations.

In analyzing the expected future cash flows of the Asset Management CGU, we compared the earnings projections with the
prior fiscal year’s projections and with the actual results achieved and evaluated any significant deviations. Furthermore, we
assessed the significant valuation parameters used for the estimate of the recoverable amount, such as the discount rate and
long- term growth rate, to the extent they are within a range of externally available forecasts.

We also recalculated the arithmetical accuracy of the discounted cash flow model used.

To assess the above assumptions made in the recoverability of goodwill we involved internal business valuation specialists.

Our procedures did not lead to any reservations relating to the measurement of the goodwill for the Asset Management CGU.


Reference to related disclosures
Information on the measurement of goodwill is provided in notes 1 and 23 of the notes to the consolidated financial
statements.


4. Recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets

Reasons why the matter was determined to be a key audit matter
As of December 31, 2021, the group reported net deferred tax assets of EUR 5,717 million.

The recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets is based on the estimation of the ability to utilize unused tax losses
and deductible temporary differences against potential future taxable income. This estimate is based, among others, on
assumptions regarding forecasted operating results based upon the approved business plan.

In light of the use of judgment in estimation of future taxable income and the ability to use tax losses, the recognition and
measurement of deferred tax assets is a key audit matter.


Auditor’s response
We obtained an understanding of the process to determine whether deductible temporary differences and unused tax losses
are identified in different jurisdictions and measured in accordance with the provisions of tax law and rules for accounting for
deferred taxes under IAS 12, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of the related controls.




                                                                                                                          358
Deutsche Bank                                   Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                              Independent auditor’s report




We tested the assumptions used to develop and allocate elements of the approved business plan as a basis for e stimating
the future taxable income of the relevant group companies and tax groups.

Furthermore, we evaluated the recognition of deferred tax assets by analyzing the key assumptions made in estimating future
taxable income. We assessed the estimates made in the forecasted operating results by comparing the underlying key
assumptions with historical and prospective data available externally. We compared the historical forecasts with the actual
results. In addition, we assessed the estimated tax adjustments and we performed sensitivity analyses on the utilization
periods of the respective deferred tax assets.

To assess the assumptions used in the recoverability of the deferred taxes, we involved our tax professionals and internal
business valuation specialists.

Our procedures did not lead to any reservations relating to the recognition and measurement of the deferred tax assets.


Reference to related disclosures
Information on the recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets is provided in notes 1 and 34 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements.


5. IT Access and Change Management in the financial reporting

Reasons why the matter was determined to be a key audit matter
The accuracy of the bank’s group financial reporting is highly dependent on the reliability and the continuity of the used
information technology due to the significant number of transactions that are processed daily.

Given the high dependency on reliable and continuing data processing and given the pervasive nature of IT controls on the
internal control system, we consider IT Access and Change Management in the group’s financial reporting as a key audit
matter.


Auditor’s response
We assessed the IT control environment including the IT general controls as well as the IT application controls relevant to the
group’s financial reporting. Our procedures also covered the changes during the year on the current IT control environment.

Moreover, we tested the operating effectiveness of prevent and detect IT general controls related to user access management
and change management across applications, databases and operating systems. Additionally, we tested IT application
controls over automated data processing, data feeds and interfaces. Our audit procedures related to IT access management
included, but were not limited to, user access provisioning and removal, privileged user access, periodic access right
recertifications, system security settings and user authentication controls. Our audit procedures related to IT change
management included, but were not limited to, evaluating if changes in the productive versions were tested and approved
prior to implementation and the ability to deploy changes was restricted to authorized users.

Furthermore, we tested if program developers had approval rights for changes in productive systems and whether they were
able to carry out any modifications due to their access rights in the productive versions of applications, databases, and
operating systems respectively to assess if these responsibilities were functionally segregated.

To assess the IT Access and Change Management in the group’s financial reporting process, we involved internal
professionals who have particular expertise in the area of IT audits.

Our procedures did not lead to any reservations relating to the IT access and change management in the group’s financial
reporting.


Reference to related disclosures
For a general description of internal controls over the financial reporting, we refer to the combined management report in
section “Internal Control over Financial Reporting”.




                                                                                                                         359
Deutsche Bank                                    Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                               Independent auditor’s report




Other information
The Supervisory Board is responsible for the Report of the Supervisory Board. The executive directors and the Supervisory
Board are responsible for the declaration pursuant to Sec. 161 AktG ["Aktiengesetz": German Stock Corporation Act] on the
German Corporate Governance Code, which is part of the combined Corporate Governance Statement as well as for the
compensation report pursuant to Sec. 162 AktG. In all other respects, the executive directors are responsible for the other
information. The other information comprises

– the combined Corporate Governance Statement pursuant to Sec. 315d HGB published on the website referred to in the
  group management report

and other parts to be included in the annual report, of which we obtained a version prior to issuing this auditor’s report, in
particular:

–   the Non-Financial Report,
–   the Responsibility Statement pursuant to Sec. 297 (2) Sentence 4 HGB in conjunction with Sec. 315 (1) Sentence 6 HGB,
–   the "Deutsche Bank – Financial Summary" section,
–   the "Deutsche Bank Group" section,
–   Compensation Report,
–   the "Corporate Governance Statement/Corporate Governance Report" section and
–   the "Supplementary Information" section,

but not the consolidated financial statements, not the group management report disclosures whose content is audited and not
our auditor’s report thereon.

Our opinions on the annual financial statements and on the group management report do not cover the other information, and
consequently we do not express an opinion or any other form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with our audit, our responsibility is to read the other information referred to above and, in so doing, to consider
whether the other information

– is materially inconsistent with the consolidated financial statements, the disclosures in the group management report whose
  content was audited or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or
– otherwise appears to be materially misstated.

If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are
required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.


Responsibilities of the executive directors and the Supervisory Board for the
consolidated financial statements and the group management report
The executive directors are responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that comply, in all material
respects, with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and the additional requirements of German commercial law pursuant to Sec. 315e
(1) HGB, and that the consolidated financial statements, in compliance with these requirements, give a true and fair view of
the assets, liabilities, financial position and financial performance of the group. In addition, the executive directors are
responsible for such internal control as they have determined necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated financial
statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the consolidated financial statements, the executive directors are responsible for assessing the group’s ability to
continue as a going concern. They also have the responsibility for disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern.
In addition, they are responsible for financial reporting based on the going concern basis of accounting unless there is an
intention to liquidate the group or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Furthermore, the executive directors are responsible for the preparation of the group management report that, as a whole,
provides an appropriate view of the group’s position and is, in all material respects, consistent with the consolidated finan cial
statements, complies with German legal requirements, and appropriately presents the opportunities and risks of future
development. In addition, the executive directors are responsible for such arrangements and measures (systems) as they
have considered necessary to enable the preparation of a group management report that is in accordance with the applicable
German legal requirements, and to be able to provide sufficient appropriate evidence for the assertions in the group
management report.




                                                                                                                            360
Deutsche Bank                                     Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                                Independent auditor’s report




The Supervisory Board is responsible for overseeing the group’s financial reporting process for the preparation of the
consolidated financial statements and of the group management report.


Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements
and of the group management report
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements as a whole are free
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and whether the group management report as a whole provides an
appropriate view of the group’s position and, in all material respects, is consistent with the consolidated financial statements
and the knowledge obtained in the audit, complies with the German legal requirements and appropriately presents the
opportunities and risks of future development, as well as to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinions on the
consolidated financial statements and on the group management report.

Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Sec. 317
HGB and the EU Audit Regulation and in compliance with German Generally Accepted Standards for Financial Statement
Audits promulgated by the Institut der Wirtschaftsprüfer (IDW) will always detect a material misstatement. Misstatements can
arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated financial statements and this group
management report.

We exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the engagement. We also:

– Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements and of the group
  management report, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and
  obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinions. The risk of not detecting a
  material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery,
  intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
– Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit of the consolidated financial statements and of
  arrangements and measures (systems) relevant to the audit of the group management report in order to design audit
  procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness
  of these systems.
– Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used by the executive directors and the reasonableness of estimates
  made by the executive directors and related disclosures.
– Conclude on the appropriateness of the executive directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on
  the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant
  doubt on the group’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required
  to draw attention in the auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements and in the group
  management report or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our respective opinions. Our conclusions are based
  on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the
  group to cease to be able to continue as a going concern.
– Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial statements, including the disclosures,
  and whether the consolidated financial statements present the underlying transactions and events in a manner that the
  consolidated financial statements give a true and fair view of the assets, liabilities, financial position and financial
  performance of the group in compliance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and the additional requirements of German
  commercial law pursuant to Sec. 315e (1) HGB.
– Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within
  the group to express opinions on the consolidated financial statements and on the group management report. We are
  responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit
  opinions.
– Evaluate the consistency of the group management report with the consolidated financial statements, its conformity with
  [German] law, and the view of the group’s position it provides.
– Perform audit procedures on the forward-looking information presented by the executive directors in the group management
  report. On the basis of sufficient appropriate audit evidence we evaluate, in particular, the significant assumptions used by
  the executive directors as a basis for the forward-looking information, and evaluate the proper derivation of the forward-
  looking information from these assumptions. We do not express a separate opinion on the forward-looking information and
  on the assumptions used as a basis. There is a substantial unavoidable risk that future events will differ materially from the
  forward-looking information.

We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the
audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit.




                                                                                                                             361
Deutsche Bank                                    Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                               Independent auditor’s report




We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied with the relevant independence
requirements, and communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our
independence and where applicable, the related safeguards.

From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were of most
significance in the audit of the consolidated financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters.
We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter.


Other legal and regulatory requirements

Report on the assurance on the electronic rendering of the consolidated financial
statements and the group management report prepared for publication purposes
in accordance with Sec. 317 (3a) HGB

Opinion
We have performed assurance work in accordance with Sec. 317 (3a) HGB to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the rendering of the consolidated financial statements and the group management report (hereinafter the “ESEF documents”)
contained       in       Deutsche_Bank_AG_KA+KLB_ESEF-2021-12-31.zip                  (SHA-256-Checksum:           d315173142
404f74c92438266ceed86b827e7184027b68bc95487ac7bff636e6) and prepared for publication purposes complies in all
material respects with the requirements of Sec. 328 (1) HGB for the electronic reporting format (“ESEF format”). In accordance
with German legal requirements, this assurance work extends only to the conversion of the information contained in the
consolidated financial statements and the group management report into the ESEF format and therefore relates neither to the
information contained within these renderings nor to any other information contained in the file identified above.

In our opinion, the rendering of the consolidated financial statements and the group management report contained in the file
identified above and prepared for publication purposes complies in all material respects with the requirements of Sec. 328 (1)
HGB for the electronic reporting format. Beyond this assurance opinion and our audit opinions on the accompanying
consolidated financial statements and the accompanying group management report for the fiscal year from 1 January 2021 to
31 December 2021 contained in the “Report on the audit of the consolidated financial statements and of the group
management report” above, we do not express any assurance opinion on the information contained within these renderings
or on the other information contained in the file identified above.


Basis for the opinion
We conducted our assurance work on the rendering of the consolidated financial statements and the group management
report contained in the file identified above in accordance with Sec. 317 (3a) HGB and the IDW Assurance Standard:
Assurance on the Electronic Rendering of Financial Statements and Management Reports Prepared for Publication Purposes
in Accordance with Sec. 317 (3a) HGB (IDW AsS 410) (10.2021) and the International Standard on Assurance Engagements
3000 (Revised). Our responsibility in accordance therewith is further described in the “Group auditor’s responsibilities for the
assurance work on the ESEF documents” section. Our audit firm applies the IDW Standard on Quality Management 1:
Requirements for Quality Management in the Audit Firm (IDW QS 1).


Responsibilities of the executive directors and the Supervisory Board for the
ESEF documents
The executive directors of the Company are responsible for the preparation of the ESEF documents including the electronic
rendering of the consolidated financial statements and the group management report in accordance with Sec. 328 (1)
Sentence 4 No. 1 HGB and for the tagging of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with Sec. 328 (1) Sentence
4 No. 2 HGB.

In addition, the executive directors of the Company are responsible for such internal control as they have determined
necessary to enable the preparation of ESEF documents that are free from material intentional or unintentional non-
compliance with the requirements of Sec. 328 (1) HGB for the electronic reporting format.

The Supervisory Board is responsible for overseeing the preparation of the ESEF documents as part of the financial reporting
process.




                                                                                                                           362
Deutsche Bank                                   Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                              Independent auditor’s report




Group auditor’s responsibilities for the assurance work on the ESEF documents
Our objective is to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the ESEF documents are free from material intentional or
unintentional non-compliance with the requirements of Sec. 328 (1) HGB. We exercise professional judgment and maintain
professional skepticism throughout the assurance work. We also:

– Identify and assess the risks of material intentional or unintentional non-compliance with the requirements of Sec. 328 (1)
  HGB, design and perform assurance procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain assurance evidence that is sufficient
  and appropriate to provide a basis for our assurance opinion.
– Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the assurance on the ESEF documents in order to design assurance
  procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an assurance opinion on the
  effectiveness of these controls.
– Evaluate the technical validity of the ESEF documents, i.e., whether the file containing the ESEF documents meets the
  requirements of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/815, in the version in force at the date of the financial
  statements, on the technical specification for this file.
– Evaluate whether the ESEF documents enable an XHTML rendering with content equivalent to the audited consolidated
  financial statements and to the audited group management report.
– Evaluate whether the tagging of the ESEF documents with Inline XBRL technology (iXBRL) in accordance with the
  requirements of Arts. 4 and 6 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/815, in the version in force at the date of
  the financial statements, enables an appropriate and complete machine-readable XBRL copy of the XHTML rendering.


Further information pursuant to Art. 10 of the EU Audit Regulation
We were elected as group auditor by the Annual General Meeting on 27 May 2021. We were engaged by the Supervisory
Board on 21 July 2021. We have been the group auditor of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft uninterrupted since fiscal year
2020.

We declare that the opinions expressed in this auditor’s report are consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee
pursuant to Art. 11 of the EU Audit Regulation (long-form audit report).


Other matter – use of the auditor’s report
Our auditor’s report must always be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements and the audited group
management report as well as the assured ESEF documents. The consolidated financial statements and the group
management report converted to the ESEF format – including the versions to be published in the Bundesanzeiger [German
Federal Gazette] – are merely electronic renderings of the audited consolidated financial statements and the audited group
management report and do not take their place. In particular, the ESEF report and our assurance opinion contained therein
are to be used solely together with the assured ESEF documents made available in electronic form .


German Public Auditor responsible for the engagement
The German Public Auditor responsible for the engagement is Mr. Holger Lösken.

Eschborn/Frankfurt am Main, 7 March 2022

Ernst & Young GmbH

Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft




Lösken                                            Mai

Wirtschaftsprüfer                                 Wirtschaftsprüfer

[German Public Auditor]                           [German Public Auditor]




                                                                                                                          363
Deutsche Bank                                    Confirmations
Annual Report 2021                               Responsibility Statement by the Management Board




Responsibility Statement by the Management Board
To the best of our knowledge, and in accordance with the applicable reporting principles, the consolidated financial statements
give a true and fair view of the assets, liabilities, financial position and profit or loss of the Group and the Group management
report, which has been combined with the management report for Deutsche Bank AG, includes a fair review of the development
and performance of the business and the position of the Group, together with a description of the principal opportunities and risks
associated with the expected development of the Group.




Frankfurt am Main, March 2, 2022




                Christian Sewing                              Karl von Rohr                            Fabrizio Campelli




                 Bernd Leukert                                 Stuart Lewis                           James von Moltke




           Alexander von zur Mühlen                          Christiana Riley                           Rebecca Short




                     Stefan Simon




                                                                                                                             364
3
Compensation Report


366	Introduction
367	Compensation of the Management Board
367	Principles for Management Board
     ­Compensation
      367	Responsibility and procedures for
           setting and reviewing Management
           Board compensation
     367	Guiding principle: Alignment of
           Management Board compensation
           to corporate strategy
     368	Compensation principles
368	Compensation-related developments in 2021
     368	Adjustment to the compensation
           system from January 1, 2021              391	Management Board compensation 2021
     370	Approval of the new compensation system        391	Current Management Board members
           by the Annual General Meeting 2021            394	Former members of the Management
     370	Changes on the Management Board                     Board
           in 2021                                  395 Outlook for the 2022 financial year
     370	Development of business and alignment          395	Planned changes on the Management
           of Management Board compensation to                Board
           corporate strategy in 2021                    395	Total target compensation and maximum
371	Principles governing the determination                   compensation
     of compensation                                     395	Targets and objectives for 2022
     371	Structure of the Management Board         397	Compensation of members of the
           compensation system 2021                      Supervisory Board
     371	Composition of the target total compen­   397	Supervisory Board Compensation for the
           sation and maximum compensation               2021 and 2020 financial years
374	Application of the compensation system         400	Comparative presentation of compensation
     in the financial year                               and earnings trends
     374	Non-performance-based components
           (fixed compensation)                     402	Independent auditor’s report
     374	Performance-based components              404	Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
           (variable compensation)                  404 Regulatory environment
     384	Appropriateness of Management Board       405 Compensation governance
           compensation and compliance with the     406 Compensation strategy
           set maximum compensation                 407 Group compensation framework
     386	Deferrals and holding periods             408 Employee groups with specific
     387	Backtesting, malus and clawback                compensation structure
     387 Information on shares and fulfilling      409	Determination of performance-based variable
           the share ownership obligation                compensation
           (Shareholding Guidelines)                410 Variable compensation structure
     388 Benefits as of the end of the mandate     411	Ex-post risk adjustment of
     389 Benefits upon early termination                variable compensation
     390	Other service contract provisions         412 Compensation decisions for 2021
     390	Deviations from the compensation system   413 Material risk taker compensation disclosure
Deutsche Bank                                  Introduction
Annual Report 2021                             Employee Compensation Report




Introduction
The compensation report for the year 2021 provides detailed information on compensation in the Deutsche Bank Group.



Compensation Report for the Management Board and the
Supervisory Board
The Compensation Report for the Management Board and the Supervisory Board for the 2021 financial year was prepared
jointly by the Management Board and the Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft (hereinafter: Deutsche
Bank AG or the Bank) in accordance with Section 162 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). The Compensation Report
describes the fundamental features of the compensation systems for Deutsche Bank’s Management Board and Supervisory
Board and provides information on the compensation granted and owed by Deutsche Bank in the 2021 financial year to each
incumbent or former member of the Management Board and Supervisory Board.

The Compensation Report fulfills the current legal and regulatory requirements, in particular of Section 162 of the German
Stock Corporation Act (AktG) and the Remuneration Ordinance for Institutions (InstitutsVergV) and takes into account the
recommendations set out in the German Corporate Governance Code (GCGC). It is also in compliance with the applicable
requirements of the accounting rules for capital market-oriented companies (German Commercial Code (HGB), International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)) as well as the guidelines issued by the working group Guidelines for Sustainable
Management Board Remuneration Systems.



Employee Compensation Report
This part of the compensation report discloses information with regard to the compensation system and structure that applies
to the employees in Deutsche Bank Group (including DWS Group). The report provides details on the Group Compensation
Framework and it outlines the decisions on Variable Compensation for 2021. Furthermore, this part contains quantitative
disclosures specific to employees identified as Material Risk Takers (MRTs) in accordance with the Remuneration Ordinance
for Institutions (Institutsvergütungsverordnung – InstVV).




                                                                                                                      366
Deutsche Bank                                   Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                              Principles for Management Board Compensation




Compensation of the Management Board

Principles for Management Board Compensation
Responsibility and procedures for setting and reviewing Management Board
compensation
The Supervisory Board as a whole is responsible for the decisions on the design of the compensation system as well as for
setting the individual compensation amounts and procedures for awarding the compensation. The Compensation Control
Committee supports the Supervisory Board in its tasks of designing and monitoring the implementation of the system and
prepares proposals for resolutions for the Supervisory Board. As necessary, the Compensation Control Committee
recommends that the Supervisory Board makes adjustments to the system. In the case of significant changes, but at least
every four years, the compensation system for the Management Board is submitted to the General Meeting for approval in
accordance with Section 120a (1) of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). The compensation system was last approved
by the General Meeting 2021 by a majority of 97.76 %.

On the basis of the approved compensation system, the Supervisory Board sets the target total compensation for each
Management Board member for the respective financial year, while taking into account the scope and complexity of the
respective Management Board member’s functional responsibilities, the length of service of the Management Board member
on the Management Board as well as the company’s financial situation. In the process, the Supervisory Board also considers
the customary market compensation, also based on both horizontal and vertical comparisons, and sets the upper limit for total
compensation (maximum compensation) (additional information is provided in the section “Appropriateness of Management
Board compensation and compliance with the set maximum compensation”).


Guiding principle: Alignment of Management Board compensation to corporate
strategy
Deutsche Bank aims to make a positive contribution to its clients, employees, investors and society in general by fostering
economic growth and social progress. Deutsche Bank would like to offer its clients solutions and provide an active contribution
to foster the creation of value by its clients. This approach is also intended to ensure that Deutsche Bank is competitive and
profitable and can operate on the basis of a strong capital and liquidity position. Deutsche Bank is committed to a corporate
culture that appropriately aligns risks and revenues.

Deutsche Bank has set ambitious targets for the Group for the period up to and including 2022. These include the further
stabilization of the Bank, the successful completion of the transformation of the Group, and sustainable profitability. The
achievement of these goals can be measured in concrete terms by the following key figures communicated by the
Management Board: (1) a planned revenue for the Group of around € 24.4 billion, (2) a continuous reduction in costs, (3) a
Common Equity Tier 1 ratio (CET1 ratio) of over 12.5 %, and (4) a return on equity (RoTE) of 8 %.

In the interest of the shareholders, the Management Board compensation system is aligned to the business strategy as well
as the sustainable and long-term development of Deutsche Bank and provides suitable incentives for a consistent
achievement of the set targets. Through the composition of total compensation comprising non-performance-based (fixed)
and performance-based (variable) compensation components, through the assessment of performance across short-term and
long-term periods and through the consideration of relevant, challenging performance parameters, the implementation of the
Group strategy and the alignment with the sustainable and long-term performance of the Group are rewarded in a clear and
understandable manner. The structure of the targets and objectives therefore comprises a balanced mix of both financial and
non-financial parameters and indicators.

Through the structuring of the compensation system, the members of the Management Board are motivated to achieve the
targets and objectives linked to Deutsche Bank’s strategy, to work individually and as a team continually towards the long-
term positive development of Deutsche Bank, without taking on disproportionately high risks. The Supervisory Board thus
ensures there is always a strong link between compensation and performance in line with shareholder interests (“pay for
performance”).




                                                                                                                         367
Deutsche Bank                                          Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                     Compensation-related developments in 2021




Compensation principles
The design of the compensation system and thus the assessment of individual compensation amounts are based on the
compensation principles outlined below. The Supervisory Board takes them into consideration when adopting its resolutions
in this context:


Corporate strategy                        The compensation system for the Management Board members is closely linked to Deutsche Bank’s
                                          strategy, thereby focusing their work on its implementation and the long-term positive development of the
                                          Group, without taking disproportionatel risks.

Shareholders’ interests                   The interests of shareholders are always taken into account when designing the specific structure of the
                                          compensation system, determining individual compensation amounts and structuring the means of
                                          compensation allocation and delivery.

Individual and collective objectives      Setting individual, divisional and collective objectives fosters not only the sustainable and long-term
                                          development of each of the business divisions, infrastructure areas or regions the Management Board
                                          members are responsible for, but also the performance of the Management Board as a collective
                                          management body.

Long-term perspective                     A long-term link to Deutsche Bank’s performance is secured by setting a greater percentage of long-term
                                          objectives in comparison to short-term objectives and by granting variable compensation exclusively in
                                          deferred form and mostly as share-based compensation with vesting and holding periods of up to seven
                                          years.

Sustainability                            Economic, social and ecological objectives in accordance with Deutsche Bank’s ESG (Environmental,
                                          Social and Governance) strategy provide incentives to act responsibly, also in the context of
                                          sustainability, and thus make an important contribution to Deutsche Bank`s long-term performance.

Appropriateness and upper limits (caps)   The appropriateness of the compensation amounts is ensured through the review of the compensation
                                          based on a horizontal comparison with peers and a vertical comparison with the workforce as well as
                                          suitable compensation caps on the achievable variable compensation and maximum compensation.


Transparency                              By avoiding unnecessary complexity in the structures and through clear and understandable reporting,
                                          the transparency of the compensation system is increased in accordance with the expectations of
                                          investors and the public as well as the regulatory requirements.

Governance                                The structuring of the compensation system and the assessment to determine the individual
                                          compensation take place within the framework of the statutory and regulatory requirements.




Compensation-related developments in 2021
Adjustment to the compensation system from January 1, 2021
The compensation system for the members of the Management Board was lastly adjusted effective as of January 1, 2021. In
its review of the compensation system, the Supervisory Board pursued in particular the following objectives:
– Simplification of the compensation structures to improve understandability and transparency
– Consideration of current market practices of comparable financial institutions (peers)
– Implementation of recent legal and regulatory developments

As a result of the review, the Supervisory Board identified three areas requiring action and decided to make the related
adjustments:




                                                                                                                                               368
Deutsche Bank                                         Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                    Compensation-related developments in 2021




Option to facilitate a more rapid        The Supervisory Board can resolve to increase the proportion of share-based variable compensation to as
compliance with the shareholding         much as 100 % until the shareholding obligation agreed with the Management Board members is fulfilled.
obligation                               This does not lead to an increase in overall variable compensation but only to an increase in the
                                         percentage awarded on the basis of shares.

Increased consistency within the         Consistent weightings and clearer structures provide greater transparency regarding the compensation
compensation system through structural   components.
adjustments                              - The variable compensation components are no longer weighted differently but in the same manner for
                                            all members of the Management Board.
                                         - All individual and divisional objectives are bundled within the short-term component and the objectives
                                            to be achieved collectively are reflected in the long-term component.
                                         - The maximum target achievement levels for the short-term component and the long-term component
                                            are harmonized at 150 % (instead of previously 200 % for the short-term component).

Management Board compensation            The compensation structures are more strongly linked to sustainability objectives derived from Deutsche
closely linked to Deutsche Bank’s ESG    Bank’s ESG strategy.
strategy                                 - ESG targets are included in the Balanced Scorecards as part of the short-term component.
                                            ESG targets can also be included in individual objectives.
                                         - Within the long-term component there is an ESG Matrix with objectives to be achieved collectively in
                                            the Environmental, Social and Governance areas. This results in an ESG-Factor of 20 % of the total
                                            variable compensation.



The following overview shows the changes in the compensation structure applicable with effect from 2021 in comparison to
the previous compensation system:




                                                                                                                                            369
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                               Compensation-related developments in 2021




Approval of the new compensation system by the Annual General Meeting 2021
The compensation system for members of the Management Board of Deutsche Bank as adjusted with effect from January 1,
2021, was submitted to the ordinary General Meeting on May 27, 2021, for approval in accordance with Section 120a (1) of
the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). The General Meeting approved the compensation system with a majority of
97.76 %.

Implementation of the adjusted compensation system took place within the framework of the Management Board service
contracts through the voluntary agreement of the Management Board members to the required contract amendments and
applied to all Management Board members incumbent during the 2021 financial year.


Changes on the Management Board in 2021
Frank Kuhnke resigned from office as member of the Management Board and Chief Operating Officer with effect from April
30, 2021. Rebecca Short was appointed member of the Management Board with effect from May 1, 2021, for a period of three
years. With effect from May 1, 2021, the Supervisory Board resolved changes in the functional responsibilities assigned to
individual Management Board members. The Management Board comprised 10 members throughout 2021. The proportion
of women in the Management Board has been 20 % since May 1, 2021.


Development of business and alignment of Management Board compensation to
corporate strategy in 2021
Management Board compensation is closely aligned with Deutsche Bank’s strategic targets. All of the individual and collective
objectives agreed with the Management Board members as well as their assessment parameters for the 2021 financial year
were discussed by the Compensation Control Committee at the beginning of the year and subsequently resolved on by the
Supervisory Board. The objectives serve overall in fostering the strategic transformation of the Group. The achievement levels
determined with respect to the objectives for the 2021 financial year at the beginning of the year 2022 reflect the extent to
which the individual objectives were achieved and thus contributed to the Bank’s performance.

Despite the persistently challenging economic environment, and also during the second year of the COVID-19 pandemic,
Deutsche Bank was successful in delivering on its transformation and generated the highest net profit in a decade. In 2021,
Deutsche Bank continued to realign its business model, while significantly reducing costs and regaining sustainable
profitability. 97 % of the planned restructuring costs were already recognized by the end of 2021.

Profit before tax amounted to € 3.4 billion and net profit rose to € 2.5 billion, which is more than four times the amount achieved
in 2020. All business segments were profitable in 2021 and revenues increased by 6 % to € 25.4 billion. This is largely due to
strong growth in new business and gains in market share: The Corporate Bank loan book grew by € 8 billion in 2021.
Investment Bank revenues rose by 4 % compared to an already strong previous year. The Private Bank recorded € 23 billion
in net inflows into investment products and €15 billion in net new client loans, while deposits grew by € 7 billion. Asset
Management saw net inflows of € 48 billion and a good performance in assets under management, now at € 928 billion – both
record levels.

In all business areas Deutsche Bank saw a strong growth in client demand for products that take Environmental, Social and
Governance (ESG) aspects into account. By the end of 2021, sustainable financing and investments product offerings
accounted for € 157 billion. Thus the € 200 billion target initially projected for 2025 in this context will probably already be
achieved in 2022. Sustainability, as one of the top management priorities since 2019, has increasingly taken center stage in
Deutsche Bank’s endeavors.

The individual objectives are bundled in the short-term component (Short-Term Award (STA)) and account for a share of 40 %
of the total variable compensation. The Supervisory Board determined an achievement level for these components for the
2021 financial year of between 130 % and 142 %. The performance of the Management Board as a collective body is reflected
in the long-term component (Long-Term Award (LTA)), which accounts for a share of 60 % of the total variable compensation.
Overall, the achievement level of the collective objectives based solely on the 2021 financial year was 71.21 %. This
achievement level accounts for 60 % of the Long-Term Award to be granted for the 2021 financial year. 30 % will be for the
2022 financial year and 10 % for the 2023 financial year. As achievement levels for prior years (at 30 % from 2020 and 10 %
from 2019) also affected the Long-Term Award for the 2021 financial year, the achievement level of this component for the
2021 financial year was 66.27 % based on the weighted achievement levels of the three financial years. Details on the
individual achievement levels are presented as an overview in this report in the chapter "Application of the compensation
system in the financial year".




                                                                                                                             370
Deutsche Bank                                 Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                            Principles governing the determination of compensation




Principles governing the determination of compensation
Structure of the Management Board compensation system 2021
The compensation system consists of non-performance-based (fixed) and performance-based (variable) components. The
fixed compensation and variable compensation together form the total compensation for a Management Board member. The
Supervisory Board defines target and maximum amounts (caps) for all compensation components.

Management Board Compensation System 2021
Components                             Objective                                                Implementation
Non-performance related compensation

Base salary                            The base compensation rewards the                -       Monthly payment; Amount of basic
                                       assumption of the role and responsibility of the         compensation on an annual basis between €
                                       respective member of the Management Board.               2.4 million and € 3.6 million.
Fringe benefits                        The fixed compensation is intended to ensure a -         Company cars and driver services, if applicable
                                       fair and market-oriented income and to ensure            moving expenses, rent subsidies, insurance
                                       that undue risks are avoided. In addition,               premiums and business representation
                                       members of the Management Board are                      expenses
Pension                                granted recurrent, other benefits and            -       A single and contractually agreed annual
                                       contributions for pension benefits.                      contribution or allowance of € 650,000 for
                                                                                                adequate pension provision

Performance related compensation

Short Term Award (STA)                 The STA rewards the individual value                 -   40 % of the total variable compensation with 3
                                       contribution of each member of the                       elements related to individual performance
                                       Management Board to achieving short- and                 (1) Individual objectives (20 %);
                                       medium-term corporate objectives in                      (2) Individual Balanced Scorecard (10 %);
                                       accordance with the corporate strategy. It               (3) Annual priorities (10 %)
                                       consists of three elements, which are tailored       -   Maximum target reached 150 %
                                       to the role and responsibilities of the respective   -   Assessment period 1 year
                                       Management Board member and can be                   -   Earliest possible disbursement in 4 tranches in
                                       individually influenced by their degree of               cash (Restricted Incentive Awards) - after 1, 3,
                                       achievement by the respective Management                 5 and 7 years after grant
                                       Board member.                                        -   Target Contribution at 100 % Achievement:
                                                                                                Between € 1.640 million and € 2.160 million



Long Term Award (LTA)                  In calculating variable compensation, the focus      -   60 % of total variable compensation with 4
                                       is on achieving long-term objectives linked to           group targets
                                       the strategy. To underline this, the Supervisory         (1) ESG factor (20 %);
                                       Board has put a focus on this component with             (2) Relative total shareholder return (15 %);
                                       a share of the LTA of 60 % of the total variable         (3) Organic capital growth (15 %);
                                       target compensation. For the LTA, the                    (4) Group component (10 %): core capital ratio,
                                       Supervisory Board sets common objectives for             leverage ratio, adjusted costs, return on
                                       the members of the Management Board. Since               tangible equity
                                       2021, the ESG factor has been an important           -   Maximum target reached 150 %
                                       part of the LTA. With its implementation and         -   Assessment period 3 years with a weighting of
                                       development, Deutsche Bank’s sustainability              60 % (FY), 30 % (FY+1), 10 % (FY+2)
                                       strategy is systematically linked to the             -   Payment in 4 tranches exclusively in shares
                                       Management Board compensation.                           (Restricted Equity Awards) – earliest possible
                                                                                                payment after 2, 3, 4, 5 years plus a respective
                                                                                                holding period of 1 year after grant
                                                                                            -   Target Contribution at 100 % Achievement:
                                                                                                Between € 2.460 million and € 3.240 million




                                                                                                                                          371
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                               Principles governing the determination of compensation




Overview




Detailed information on the compensation system for members of the Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG is available
on the company’s website: Compensation system for the Management Board Members from January 2021 onwards.


Composition of the target total compensation and maximum compensation
The Supervisory Board determines for each Management Board member a target (reference) total compensation on the basis
of the compensation system approved by the General Meeting. It also determines, in accordance with the recommendation of
the German Corporate Governance Code, what relative proportions the fixed compensation on the one hand and short-term
and long-term variable compensation on the other hand have in the target total compensation. In this context, the Supervisory
Board ensures in particular that the performance-based compensation linked to achieving long-term objectives exceeds the
portion of performance-based compensation linked to short-term objectives.

When setting the target total compensation for each member of the Management Board, the Supervisory Board takes into
account the scope and complexity of the respective Management Board member’s functional responsibility as well as the
experience and length of service of the member on the Management Board. Furthermore, the compensation amounts are
reviewed for their appropriateness on the basis of market data for suitable peer groups. On the basis of these criteria, the
Supervisory Board set the relative percentages for the compensation components within the target total compensation as
follows:

Relative shares of the total annual target compensation allocated to the different compensation components (%)
                                                                                                                 Relative share of total
Compensation components                                                                                            compensation in %
Base Salary                                                                                                                ~ 33-37 %
Regular fringe benefits                                                                                                        ~1%
Pension service costs / pension allowance                                                                                    ~ 7-9 %
Short-Term Award                                                                                                           ~ 22-23 %
Long-Term Award                                                                                                            ~ 33-34 %
Reference total compensation                                                                                                   100 %


The compensation of the Management Board members is limited (capped) in several ways (maximum compensation).

Pursuant to § 25a para. 5 of the German Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz – KWG), the ratio of fixed to variable compensation
is generally limited to 1:1 (cap regulation), i.e. the amount of variable compensation must not exceed that of fixed
compensation, unless the shareholders of a bank resolve to increase the ratio to up to 1:2. The General Meeting in May 2014
made use of this possibility and increased the ratio to 1:2.




                                                                                                                                 372
Deutsche Bank                                                        Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                   Principles governing the determination of compensation




The Supervisory Board additionally limited the maximum possible achievement levels for the short-term objectives (STA) and
long-term objectives (LTA) consistently to 150 % of the target variable compensation. Furthermore, it specified an additional
amount limit (cap) for the aggregate amount of base salary, STA and LTA of € 9.85 million. This means that even with target
achievement levels that would lead to higher compensation amounts, compensation is capped at a maximum of € 9.85 million.
After the target achievement level is assessed, if the calculation should result in variable compensation or total compensation
that exceeds one of the specified caps, the variable compensation is to be reduced. This is to take place through a pro rata
reduction of the STA and LTA.

Target and maximum amounts of base salary and variable compensation
                                                                                                                                              2021            2020
                                                                                       Base          Short-Term           Long-Term           Total           Total
in €                                                                                  salary             Award                Award   compensation2   compensation2
CEO
   Target value                                                                 3,600,000            2,160,000           3,240,000      9,000,000       8,700,000
   Maximum value                                                                3,600,000            3,240,000           4,860,000      9,850,000       9,850,000
President and ordinary board member responsible for
PB/AM1
   Target value                                                                 3,000,000            1,760,000           2,640,000      7,400,000       7,400,000
   Maximum value                                                                3,000,000            2,640,000           3,960,000      9,600,000       9,850,000
Ordinary Board Members responsible for Finance (CFO) and
Risk Management (CRO)
   Target value                                                                 2,800,000            1,680,000           2,520,000      7,000,000       6,700,000
   Maximum value                                                                2,800,000            2,520,000           3,780,000      9,100,000       9,400,000
All other Ordinary Board Members
   Target value                                                                 2,400,000            1,640,000           2,460,000      6,500,000       6,500,000
   Maximum value                                                                2,400,000            2,460,000           3,690,000      8,550,000       9,200,000

1
    PB = Retail Bank / AM = Asset Management
2.
    Limit the maximum total amount of basic salary and variable compensation to the upper limit set by the Supervisory Board.



In addition, in accordance with Section 87a (1) sentence 2 No. 1 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG), the Supervisory
Board also set an upper limit for the maximum total compensation of € 12 million for each Management Board member
(Maximum Compensation). The Maximum Compensation is set consistently for all Management Board members. The
Maximum Compensation corresponds to the sum of all compensation components for any financial year. This comprises not
only the base salary, STA and LTA, but also the fringe benefits and service costs for the company pension plan or pension
allowances.




                                                                                                                                                             373
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                               Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Application of the compensation system in the financial year
Non-performance-based components (fixed compensation)
The fixed compensation components in the form of base salary, fringe benefits and contributions to the pension plan or pension
allowances were granted in the financial year as non-performance-based compensation and in accordance with the individual
agreements in the service contracts.

The expenses for fringe benefits and pension service costs vary in their annual amounts. Although the contribution to Deutsche
Bank’s pension plan is defined consistently for all Management Board members, the amounts to be contributed by Deutsche
Bank during the year in the form of pension service cost accruals vary, however, based on the length of service on the
Management Board within the financial year, the age of the Management Board member and actuarial figures (additional
information is provided in the section “Benefits upon regular contract termination”).


Performance-based components (variable compensation)
The Supervisory Board, based on the proposal of the Compensation Control Committee, determined the variable
compensation for the Management Board members for the 2021 financial year. Variable compensation comprises two
components, a short-term component (Short-Term Award (STA)) with a weighting of 40 % and a long-term component (Long-
Term Award (LTA)) with a weighting of 60 % in relation to the target variable compensation.

All objectives, measurements and assessment criteria that were used for the assessment of performance for the 2021 financial
year are derived from Deutsche Bank’s strategy and are in line with the compensation system approved by the General
Meeting. The objectives were selected to set suitable incentives for the Management Board members, to promote the
development of Deutsche Bank’s earnings and the alignment with the interests of shareholders as well as to fulfill Deutsche
Bank’s social responsibility through the inclusion of sustainability aspects and climate protection. The challenging objectiv es
reflect the Bank’s ambitions. If the objectives are not achieved, the variable compensation can be zero; in case of over -
achievement, the maximum achievement level is limited to 150 % of the target value.

Balance of financial and non-financial objectives

Financial and non-financial objectives are considered in a balanced way when setting the objectives. In relation to the total
variable compensation, the financial targets prevailed in the 2021 financial year with a share of around 54 %. Both the financial
and non-financial objectives have been chosen in such a way that they are quantitatively or qualitatively measurable at the
end of the financial year. Around 73 % of the targets are quantitative measurable and a portion of around 27 % is measured
qualitatively.

Short-Term Award (STA)

The amount of the Short-Term Award for the 2021 financial year is based on the achievement level of the short and medium-
term individual and divisional objectives. It comprises the following three elements with a weighting within the STA as indicated:

– Individual Objectives (50 %)
– Individual Balanced Scorecards (25 %)
– Annual Priorities (25 %)

For each of these elements, the Supervisory Board determines the achievement level based on an assessment at the
beginning of the following year of the performance during the previous year. The achievement of the three components
determines the achievement level for each Management Board member which determines the amount of the short-term
component for the previous fiscal year.




                                                                                                                            374
Deutsche Bank                                                      Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                 Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Determination of the cash value of the Short-Term Award




* On the basis of 100 %. Pro rata temporis upon joining or leaving during the year

All objectives of the STA are assessed over a period of one year. The achievement levels for the STA objectives can be up to
a maximum of 150 %. If an objective is not met, the achievement level can be as low as zero. The STA determined for the
financial year is generally granted in the form of cash compensation (Restricted Incentive Awards). The disbursement takes
place in 4 tranches of 25 % each, after 1, 3, 5, and 7 years, i.e. over a total vesting period of 7 years after the performance
period. All tranches are subject to specific performance and forfeiture conditions during this retention period. The Supervisory
Board can resolve to grant the STA in the form of Restricted Equity Awards instead of cash compensation in order to facilitate
a faster fulfillment of the shareholding requirement agreed with the Management Board members.

Individual objectives
At the beginning of the year, the Supervisory Board sets individual and divisional objectives for each member of the
Management Board, the weightings of these objectives in relation to one another and the relevant quantitatively or qualitatively
measurable performance criteria for their assessment. In this context, the objectives are chosen in such a way that they are
challenging, ambitious and sufficiently concrete in order to ensure there is an appropriate alignment of performance and
compensation and that the “pay-for-performance” principle is taken into account.

The individual and divisional objectives are derived from the corporate strategy and foster its implementation. They are set for
each Management Board member in consideration of his or her respective area of responsibility and the contribution of this
area of responsibility to advancing Deutsche Bank’s overall strategy. Individual objectives can also be defined as project or
regional targets. Besides operational measures, the implementation of strategic projects and initiatives can be agreed as
objectives as well, if they are directly instrumental in the implementation of the strategy, by contributing to, for example, the
structure, organization and long-term development of Deutsche Bank.




                                                                                                                                  375
Deutsche Bank                                       Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                  Application of the compensation system in the financial year




At the beginning of the 2021 financial year, between 4 and 6 individual objectives were set with different weightings for each
Management Board member. In light of the changes on the Management Board effective May 1, 2021, an adjustment was
made during the year to the Business Allocation Plan. The objectives were correspondingly adjusted to reflect the new areas
of functional responsibility. Accordingly, the Management Board members had up to 8 objectives in total in the financial year,
including some that applied only for part of the year. All of the objectives that applied during the year were taken into account
in the year-end assessment in accordance with their weightings and pro rata temporis according to the duration of their
respective applicability. The following overview shows the objectives resolved by the Supervisory Board for the Management
Board members according to their objective category and their weightings pro rata in relation to the full year.

Management Board                        Weighting
Member                      Duration            %     Individual objectives

Christian Sewing           Jan - Dec      21.67 %     Continue to develop Deutsche Bank culture & vision
                                          20.00 %     Deliver on Deutsche Bank Group strategy execution and group objectives
                                          15.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct
                                          10.00 %     Implement Bank-wide ESG & Sustainable Banking strategy
                                          10.00 %     Strengthen positioning with key political stakeholders
                           Jan - Apr                  Deliver on strategy for the divisions Corporate Bank and Investment Bank to achieve
                                           6.67 %     sustainable profitability
                                           3.33 %     Ensure delivery of critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime
                           May - Dec      13.33 %     Provide oversight to transformation for the Human Resources and Real Estate divisions



Karl von Rohr              Jan - Dec      40.00 %     Deliver on strategy execution for the division Private Bank
                                          20.00 %     Provide Oversight for Regions Germany & EMEA
                                          15.00 %     Support the execution of the DWS strategy as DWS chairman
                                          10.00 %     Ensure delivery on critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime
                                          10.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct
                                           5.00 %     Achieve group-wide financial objectives 2021



Fabrizio Campelli          Jan - Apr      16.67 %     Drive Deutsche Bank`s transformation agenda
                                           8.33 %     Manage the transformation of the Human Resources division
                                           5.00 %     Drive delivery of Management Board priorities across Deutsche Bank
                           Jan - Dec      10.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct
                           May - Dec                  Deliver on strategy for the divisions Corporate Bank and Investment Bank to achieve
                                          24.58 %     sustainable profitability
                                          16.67 %     Ensure delivery of critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime
                                                      Drive stronger front-to-back alignment for the Corporate Bank and Investment Bank
                                          14.58 %     divisions
                           Aug - Dec       4.17 %     Provide oversight to Region UK and Ireland



Bernd Leukert              Jan - Dec      36.67 %     Execute strategy for the division Technology, Data & Innovation
                                          20.00 %     Technology: Continue improvement of IT-structures
                                          16.67 %     Data: Drive quality enhancements
                                          15.00 %     Innovation: Drive client-centric technology approach across the bank
                                           5.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct
                           May - Dec       6.67 %     Integrate certain areas under the former COO responsibility



Stuart Lewis               Jan - Dec      30.00 %     Foster a strong risk-return culture throughout the bank
                                          23.75 %     Continue to develop and strengthen the risk organization
                                          22.08 %     Processing of regulatory and internal audit findings
                                           8.33 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct
                           Jan - Apr      10.00 %     Ensure delivery of critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime
                            Jan - Jul      5.83 %     Provide oversight to Region UK and Ireland



James von Moltke           Jan - Dec      40.00 %     Ensure execution of Group financial plan through Group Performance Management
                                          25.00 %     Strengthen investor and Rating Agencies engagement
                                          15.00 %     Deliver Balance Sheet & Liquidity Optimization
                                          15.00 %     Execute Group Finance strategy, including Financial & Analytics Enhancement
                                           5.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct



Alexander von zur Mühlen   Jan - Dec      40.00 %     Execute strategy for the region APAC
                                          30.00 %     Strengthen APAC franchise and client focus
                                          20.00 %     Ensure delivery of critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime
                                          10.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct




                                                                                                                                              376
Deutsche Bank                                     Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Management Board                      Weighting
Member                     Duration           %     Individual objectives

Christiana Riley          Jan - Dec     30.00 %     Execute strategy for the regions North and South America
                                        25.00 %     Strengthen engagement with US regulators
                                        20.00 %     Ensure delivery of critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime
                                        20.00 %     Strengthen client engagement
                                         5.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct



Rebecca Short            May - Dec      30.00 %     Drive Capital Release Unit reductions
                                        30.00 %     Drive Deutsche Bank`s transformation agenda
                                        30.00 %     Drive direct cost reduction
                                        10.00 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct



Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon    Jan - Dec     26.67 %     Further drive down bank- wide litigation portfolio
                                        25.00 %     Improve strategic engagement with regulatory authorities
                                        13.33 %     Drive overhaul of policy including setting and implementation
                                         8.33 %     Further evolve Deutsche Bank culture, with a focus on integrity and conduct
                         May - Dec      26.67 %     Ensure delivery of critical remediation activities within the area of financial crime



For the qualitative objectives, the Supervisory Board set expectations and financial and/or non-financial performance criteria
at the beginning of the year (and at the time of the realignment of the objectives as of May 1, 2021). These enable the
Supervisory Board to objectively assess the performance contribution of the respective Management Board member towards
the concrete execution of the objectives which are to be assessed for the performance year at the beginning of the following
year. The achievement levels thus determined for the individual objectives are combined into an average for each
Management Board member according to pre-defined weightings. The achievement level determined in this manner is
multiplied by 50 % of the target amount of variable compensation for the STA. This results in the calculated payment amount
for the component comprising the individual objectives.

The achievement levels for the individual objectives were between 123 % and 146 % for the 2021 financial year. An overview
of the overall achievement levels of the Management Board members’ individual contributions to performance in the financial
year is provided at the end of this sub-section Short-Term Award.

Individual Balanced Scorecard
In addition to the individual objectives, the Short-Term Award (STA) is also based on the results of the individual Balanced
Scorecards of the Management Board members. Balanced Scorecards make it possible to transform strategic objectives into
operating practices through concrete actions. With the Balanced Scorecards, the Bank has an appropriate tool for the steering
and control of key performance indicators that can be used to check the achievement level of financial and non-financial
objectives against pre-defined measurement parameters at any time and to measure them transparently for the performance
year at the beginning of the following year. At the same time, the Balanced Scorecards provide an overview of the priorities
of the individual divisions across the entire Group. The respective Management Board members’ functional responsibilities
are linked with pre-defined key financial figures and non-financial targets from various categories. A total of 53 Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs) are assigned to these categories, of which 10 to 28 are relevant for each Management Board
member depending on their areas of functional responsibility and the respective number of scorecards. The following chart
shows the categories and some of the KPIs, in particular those with general applicability:




                                                                                                                                            377
Deutsche Bank                                                     Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                Application of the compensation system in the financial year




The methodology for the Balanced Scorecards has been continually developed further since their introduction and adjusted
to meet changing requirements. In order to link aspects from Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) areas as well as
sustainability more closely to the compensation system, these topics were given an even greater consideration in 2021.

The objectives within the individual categories are set at the beginning of the year for each Management Board member
individually and corresponding Key Performance Indicators or parameters are assigned thereto. In addition, the percentage
weighting is set for each category. The weightings that the individual categories have within the overall Balanced Scorecard
can be up to 65 % depending on the functional responsibility of the Management Board member. The objectives in the
Balanced Scorecard cannot be the same as the objectives of the sub-component “individual objectives” in order to avoid that
individual objectives are considered and assessed more than once.

The key performance indicators of the BSC are measured continuously throughout the year and an overall assessment is
made at the end of the year. For each individual objective, the Balanced Scorecard shows if it was fulfilled or exceeded based
on the defined performance criteria (“green”), or only achieved to less than 100 % (“amber”) or not achieved (“red”). When all
objectives of a category are exceeded, the achievement level can be up to 150 %. However, if none of the targets of a category
is met, the achievement level is 0 %. From the overall achievement levels of the three categories and their weightings, an
overall achievement level for the individual Balanced Scorecard is derived.




1
    Resulting bands of KPI categories: Green (100-150 %); Green to amber (75-125 %), Green to red (50-100 %), Amber to red (25 %-75 %), Red (0 %).


The individual Balanced Scorecard achievement levels were between 100 % and 147 % for the 2021 financial year. An
overview of the overall achievement levels of the Management Board members’ individual contributions to performance in the
financial year 2021 is provided at the end of this sub-section Short-Term Award.

Annual Priorities
With the help of Annual Priorities, the Supervisory Board assesses the profitability and performance-related contributions of
each Management Board member towards consistently pre-defined focus topics for the year. These focus topics are derived
from, and meant to further support, Deutsche Bank’s strategy. They are different from the individual objectives and Balanced
Scorecards in order to avoid that the same objectives are considered or assessed more than once. This provides the possibility
to set operational focal points annually depending on the current priorities and the stage of strategy execution. The
performance criteria to be used for the assessment can be of both a financial and non-financial nature.

For the 2021 financial year, the Supervisory Board specified focal point topics as Annual Priorities that are related to the
following areas:

– Corporate strategy / transformation
– Risk management

Within the corporate strategy / transformation area, the Supervisory Board assesses the achievement levels of project-related
activities that are related to the corporate and transformation strategy in the “Book of Work” assigned to the individual
Management Board members and measured throughout the year. Each activity is in turn linked to measurement criteria that
enable a quantitative measurement. Based on this, an individual level of achievement of the performance of each individual
Management Board member can be derived at the end of the financial year.




                                                                                                                                                     378
Deutsche Bank                                                       Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                  Application of the compensation system in the financial year




With regard to risk management, the Supervisory Board assesses how each individual member of the Management Board
reacted to certain and sometimes unforeseen events and developments that occurred during the financial year, particularly
from the risk management perspective. At the end of the year, the achievement level is assessed qualitatively.

The achievement levels with respect to the Annual Priorities were between 125 % and 150 % for the 2021 financial year. An
overview of the overall achievement levels of the Management Board members’ individual contributions to performance in the
financial year is provided at the end of this sub-section Short-Term Award.

Overall achievement of the Short-Term Award
For the 2021 financial year, the following overall levels of achievement have been determined for the members of the
Management Board on the basis of the level of achievement with respect to the objectives for the three components identified
by the Supervisory Board in the Short-Term Award:

Short-Term Award overall achievement
                                                                                                          Target                   Target              Overall
                                                                                                           Value         achievement level   achievement STA
                                                                                                           (in €)                  (in %)               (in €)
Christian Sewing                                                                                       2,160,000                   142 %            3,065,400
Karl von Rohr                                                                                          1,760,000                   136 %            2,393,600
Fabrizio Campelli                                                                                      1,640,000                   135 %            2,218,783
Bernd Leukert                                                                                          1,640,000                   132 %            2,161,383
Stuart Lewis                                                                                           1,680,000                   134 %            2,258,200
James von Moltke                                                                                       1,680,000                   136 %            2,278,500
Alexander von zur Mühlen                                                                               1,640,000                   130 %            2,132,000
Christiana Riley                                                                                       1,640,000                   132 %            2,162,750
Rebecca Short1                                                                                         1,093,333                   132 %            1,440,467
Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon                                                                                 1,640,000                   130 %            2,134,050
Frank Kuhnke2                                                                                            546,667                   116 %              634,133
1
    Member since May 1, 2021.
2
    Member until April 30, 2021. The target achievement level was determined in connection with the departure.


Long-Term Award (LTA)
When determining the variable compensation, a major focus is placed on the achievement of long-term objectives linked to
Deutsche Bank’s strategy. To emphasize this, the Supervisory Board decided that the LTA accounts for 60 % of the total
target variable compensation. At the beginning of each financial year, the Supervisory Board specifies the collective long-term
objectives for the Management Board members for the LTA. The objectives and their weighting in the LTA for 2021 are:

      –   ESG Factor (33.33 %)
      –   Relative Total Shareholder Return of the Deutsche Bank share (25 %)
      –   Organic Capital Growth (25 %)
      –   Group Component (16.67 %)

The Relative Total Shareholder Return (RTSR) of the Deutsche Bank share and Organic Capital Growth already formed the
basis for the assessment of the LTA when the compensation system was approved by the General Annual Meeting in 2017
and have been retained for the measurement of the LTA. For the consistent alignment of Management Board compensation
with the Bank’s sustainability strategy, the Client & Culture Factor applicable until 2020 was transferred into the ESG Factor,
which was newly introduced starting from the 2021 financial year. The importance of the ESG Factor is particularly emphasized
through the highest weighting within the LTA at 33.33 %, as well as its weighting of 20 % of total variable compensation.
Through the continuation of the objectives underlying the Group Component relating to core capital, leverage ratio, costs and
return on equity, the long-term tracking of these metrics for Deutsche Bank’s capital, risk, costs and earnings profile is ensured.
By moving the Group Component from the STA to the LTA, there is a bundling of all collective objectives for the Management
Board members in the long-term component, and the contribution to sustainability is emphasized as an aspect relevant for the
compensation of all Management Board members.




                                                                                                                                                         379
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                               Application of the compensation system in the financial year




All objectives of the LTA are assessed over a period of three years. At the end of each financial year, the Supervisory Board
determines the level of achievement for each of the collective objectives during the preceding year. 60 % of the target amount
of each objective of the LTA is multiplied by the achievement level determined in this manner, and this amount feeds into the
variable compensation for the preceding financial year. In the following year, 30 % of the target amount is multiplied by the
respective achievement level, and in the next following year 10 %. This ensures that weighted outcomes of the achievement
levels for three financial years feed into the amount of the LTA to be determined each year.




The achievement levels for the LTA objectives can be up to a maximum of 150 %. If the objective is not met, the achievement
level can be as low as zero. The LTA determined for a financial year is granted in the form of Restricted Equity Awards, which
vest over a deferral period of 5 years, in 4 tranches after 2, 3, 4, and 5 years, and are subject to the share price performance
during this period. Each tranche that vests is followed by an additional one-year holding period so that the Management Board
members can dispose of the first LTA tranche at the earliest after three years, and of the full amount only after six years.
During the deferral and holding periods, the tranches are subject to specific performance and forfeiture conditions.

ESG factor
Deutsche Bank has set for itself the aim of spearheading sustainability initiatives in the financial sector and thus contributing
to a more environmentally, socially and financially well-governed economy. To closely and consistently link Management
Board compensation to the Bank’s sustainability strategy, the Supervisory Board resolved to combine the Bank’s strategic
sustainability targets in an Environmental, Social and Governance Matrix (ESG Matrix) and to implement the results as one
of the collective objectives, the ESG Factor, within the LTA.

To this end, the targets and objectives related to corporate governance, the control environment and improvement measures
for the prevention of financial crime, which were bundled together in the Client & Culture Factor that was applicable until 2020,
were expanded to include environmental and social aspects and were combined in the newly implemented ESG Matrix.

The ESG Factor comprises the largest portion of the LTA with a share of 33.33 %. This corresponds to 20 % of the total
variable compensation and emphasizes the importance of the ESG agenda for Deutsche Bank. At the beginning of each
financial year, the Supervisory Board sets target amounts as well as upper and lower limits for all of the objectives bundled in
the ESG Matrix. Based on these fixed threshold values, the assessment of the achievements for the previous year takes place
retrospectively. The following chart shows the target amounts, the results as of the end of the year and the resulting
achievement level for the 2021 financial year:




                                                                                                                           380
Deutsche Bank                                   Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                              Application of the compensation system in the financial year




In the 2021 financial year, the performance figures of the ESG Matrix, measured against the pre-defined target amounts and
upper and lower limits, developed as follows:

– Based on a total volume of sustainable financings and investments of 46 billion euros by the end of 2020, the objective set
  for 2021 for an increase of € 31 billion euros was clearly exceeded with an actual increase of € 111 billion to a total volume
  of € 157 billion. This means that the objective reached the maximum achievement level of 150 %. The Supervisory Board
  took this development as a reason to set a more ambitious target for this objective for the 2022 financial year in order to
  make this objective a stronger incentive for Management Board members (see section “Outlook for the 2022 financial
  year”).
– With regard to the second objective under Environment, i.e. own operations, already 87 % of the Bank’s own energy
  consumption was drawn from renewable energy sources as of the end of the year. Assuming a target of 80 % and a cap
  of 90 %, the achievement level for this objective was 135 %.
– The total building-related energy consumption was successfully lowered in 2021 by 19.2 % compared to 2019. The target
  value of a 15 % reduction was thus exceeded and reached the target achievement level of 150 %.
– In the Social area, the objective “Employee feedback culture” was measured on the basis of the last employee survey,
  which is decisive for the full-year figure of 70 %. The achievement level reached in 2021 was thus 100 %.
– The development with regard to Gender diversity, however, remained below the target figure. Here the achievement level
  was 80 %,
– The two performance indicators taken over from the former Culture & Client Factor in the Governance area fed into the
  assessment with achievement levels of 50 % for the so-called Control Environment Assessment Grade and 42 % in terms
  of measures to combat economic crime and prevent money laundering activities and the fulfillment of regulatory
  requirements.

From the weighted achievement levels for the individual objectives, an overall achievement level for the ESG Factor for the
2021 financial year has been calculated and set at 89,38 %. A portion of 60 % of the variable target compensation attributable
to the ESG factor is multiplied by the overall target achievement level for 2021 and thus determines the largest portion of the
variable compensation granted for 2021. A portion of 30 % of the target compensation is based on the achievement level for
the Client & Culture Factor that was applicable for the 2020 financial year and set at 37,5 %, and a portion of 10 % is
determined based on the achievement level for the 2019 financial year at 50 %. This results in a weighted overall achievement
level of 69.88 % for the granting of the portion of the LTA that is attributable to the ESG Factor.




                                                                                                                          381
Deutsche Bank                                  Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                             Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Relative Total Shareholder Return (RTSR)
A key strategic target of the Bank is the performance of the Deutsche Bank share in comparison to the performance of the
shares of its competitors (Relative Total Shareholder Return (RTSR)). The target for the RTSR for the Deutsche Bank share
in comparison to selected financial institutions is intended to strengthen the sustainable performance of the Deutsche Bank
share. The RTSR links the interests of the Management Board with those of shareholders. In addition, the RTSR provides a
relative measurement of performance, creating an incentive to outperform the relevant peers.

The RTSR is derived from the total shareholder return of the Deutsche Bank share in relation to the average total shareholder
returns of a selected peer group. The Total Shareholder Return is defined as the share price performance plus theoretically
reinvested gross dividends. The RTSR is calculated as a percentage based on the total shareholder return of the Deutsche
Bank share in relation to the average total shareholder returns of the peer group. If the RTSR average is greater than 100 %,
then the target achievement level increases proportionally to an upper limit of 150 % of the target figure, i.e., the target
achievement level increases by 1 % for each percentage point above 100 %. If the RTSR average is less than 100 %, the
target achievement level declines disproportionately. For each percentage point decline of the RTSR in the range of 80 % and
less than 100 % the target achievement level declines by two percentage points. In the range between less than 60 % and
80 %, the target achievement level is reduced for each percentage point decline by three percentage points. If the RTSR does
not exceed 60 % over the entire assessment period, the target achievement level is zero.




The peer group used as the basis for calculating the RTSR is selected from among the companies with generally comparable
business activities as well as a comparable size and international presence. The Supervisory Board reviews the composition
of the peer group regularly. The peer group for the RTSR in 2021 is comprised of the following 11 banks: Banco Santander,
BNP Paribas, HSBC, UBS, Bank of America, Citigroup, JP Morgan Chase, UniCredit, Barclays, Credit Suisse and Société
Générale.




                                                                                                                       382
Deutsche Bank                                   Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                              Application of the compensation system in the financial year




In 2021, Deutsche Bank’s share price increased by 123.1 % and developed better than the shares of 4 out of 11 competitors
in the peer group with an average share price plus of 130.6 % but remained below the average share price development of
the peer group. The achievement level for the 2021 financial year thus came to 88 %. A portion of 60 % of the target variable
compensation attributable to the RTSR is multiplied by the overall achievement level for 2021. A portion of 30 % of the target
compensation is based on the achievement level for the 2020 financial year, which was 160 %, and a portion of 10 % is
determined based on the achievement level of 60 % for the 2019 financial year. This results in a weighted overall achievement
level of 106.8 % for the granting of the portion of the LTA that is attributable to the RTSR.
Organic Capital Growth
Another key objective of Deutsche Bank is its growth. As an incentive for the Management Board members to promote growth,
the Supervisory Board defined organic capital growth on a net basis as a long-term objective for the LTA.

Organic Capital Growth is defined as the balance of the following changes (which are reported in the Consolidated Statement
of Changes in Equity) occurring during the financial year, divided by total shareholders’ equity as of December 31 of the
preceding financial year:

–   Total comprehensive income, net of tax
–   Coupon on additional equity components, net of tax
–   Remeasurement gains (losses) related to defined benefit pension plans, net of tax
–   Option premiums and other effects from options on Deutsche Bank shares
–   Net gains (losses) on treasury shares sold

Based thereon, “inorganic” changes in equity, in particular the payment of a dividend or a capital increase, are of no relevance
to the achievement of the objective.

Starting from an average Organic Capital Growth of 2.5 % (lower limit), the target achievement level increases by 1 % for each
0.05 % of growth up to the 150 % cap, which will be reached upon an Organic Capital Growth of 10 % or more (upper limit
cap). If capital growth does not exceed 2.5 % in the assessment period, the target achievement level is zero.




                                                                                                                          383
Deutsche Bank                                              Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                         Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Organic Capital Growth pursuant to the definition specified above developed positively in 2021 at 3.83 % and thus for the first
time in the three-year period was above the lower limit of 2.5 %. This results in an achievement level of 26 %. A portion of
60 % of the target variable compensation attributable to Organic Capital Growth is multiplied by the overall achievement level
for 2021. A portion of 30 % of the target compensation is based on the achievement level for the 2020 financial year, which
was 0 %, and a portion of 10 % is determined based on the achievement level for the 2019 financial year of 0 %. This results
in a weighted overall achievement level of 15.6 % for the granting of the portion of the LTA that is attributable to Organic
Capital Growth.

Group Component
Through the Group Component, the Supervisory Board links the key financial figures supporting the corporate strategy with
the Management Board’s compensation and thus establishes an incentive to sustainably foster the Bank’s capital, risk, costs
and earnings profile. The Group Component also provides a link to the compensation for employees, as this is an employee
compensation system component.

The Supervisory Board resolved to take the Group Component out of the STA and integrate it as a fourth objective in the LTA.
As a result, all of the objectives to be achieved collectively are bundled in the long-term component. The measurement over
a three-year period supports the long-term monitoring of these objectives. The key financial figures of the Group Component
have remained unchanged since 2017.

LTA group component
Core capital ratio                             Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio of the Bank in relation to its risk-weighted assets
Leverage ratio                                 The Bank’s core capital as a percentage of its total leverage exposure pursuant to
                                               the definitions of the Capital Requirements Regulation / Capital Requirements
                                               Directive 4
Adjusted costs (excluding transformation       Total noninterest expenses, excluding transformation costs, restructuring, severance and litigation costs
charges)                                       as well as impairments of goodwill and other intangible assets
Return on tangible equity                      Net income (or loss) attributable to shareholders as a percentage of average
                                               tangible shareholders’ equity. The latter is determined by deducting goodwill and
                                               other intangible assets from shareholders’ equity


The four objectives specified above have been assigned an equal weighting. If the performance metric-based objectives are
not achieved during the assessment period, the Supervisory Board may determine that a Group Component will not be
granted.

In the 2021 financial year, the four performance indicators for the Group Component of the LTA developed as follows: The
target achievement levels of the Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio and the leverage ratio (additional information is
provided in the “Leverage ratio” section of the Risk Report) were 100 % and the target achievement rate for the adjusted non-
interest expenses was 20 %. The target achievement level of the objective for the Group Return on tangible equity reached
90 % in 2021.

The overall achievement level of all four equally weighted objectives of the Group Component was 77.5 %. A portion of 60 %
of the target variable compensation attributable to the Group Component is multiplied by the overall achievement level for
2021. A portion of 30 % of the target compensation is based on the achievement level for the 2020 financial year, which was
72.5 %, and a portion of 10 % is determined based on the achievement level for the 2019 financial year at 60 %. This results
in a weighted overall achievement level of 74.25 % for the granting of the portion of the LTA that is attributable to the Group
Component.

Long-Term Award overall achievement
                                                                                                                                    Overall achievement
in %                                       Objectives                         Relative portion           Target achievement level   LTA
                                           ESG-Factor                                      33.33 %                       69.88 %
Long-Term Award                            Relative return on shares                       25.00 %                      106.80 %
                                                                                                                                               66.27 %
(cumulative over 3 years)                  Organic capital-growth                          25.00 %                       15.60 %
                                           Group component                                 16.67 %                       74.25 %


Appropriateness of Management Board compensation and compliance with the
set maximum compensation
The Supervisory Board regularly reviews the appropriateness of the individual compensation components as well as the
amount of total compensation. The review of the appropriateness of Management Board compensation concluded that the
Management Board compensation resulting from the achievement levels for the 2021 financial year is appropriate.




                                                                                                                                                  384
Deutsche Bank                                   Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                              Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Horizontal appropriateness

Through the horizontal comparison, the Supervisory Board ensures that the target total compensation is appropriate in relation
to the tasks and achievements of the Management Board as well as the company’s situation and is also customary in the
market. In this context, the level and structure of compensation, in particular, are examined at comparable companies (peer
groups). Suitable companies in consideration of Deutsche Bank’s market position (in particular with regard to business sector,
size and country) are used as the basis for this comparison. The assessment of horizontal appropriateness takes place in
comparison with the following three peer groups.




The horizontal appropriateness of the Management Board compensation is reviewed annually by the Supervisory Board. The
Supervisory Board regularly engages external compensation advisors for the review of horizontal appropriateness, making
sure that these advisors are independent from the Management Board and Deutsche Bank. The Supervisory Board takes the
results of the review into consideration when setting the target total compensation for the Management Board members.

Vertical appropriateness

In addition to the horizontal comparison, the Supervisory Board considers a vertical comparison, which compares the
compensation of the Management Board and the compensation of the workforce. Within the vertical comparison, the
Supervisory Board considers in particular, in accordance with the German Corporate Governance Code, the development of
the compensation over time. This involves a comparison of the Management Board compensation and the compensation of
two groups of employees. Taken into account are, on the one hand, the compensation of the senior management, which
comprises the first management level below the Management Board and members of the top executive committees of the
divisions, as well as of management board members of significant institutions within the Deutsche Bank Group and of
corresponding management board-1 level positions with management responsibility. The senior management compensation
is compared to, on the other hand, the compensation of all other employees of Deutsche Bank Group worldwide (tariff and
non-tariff employees).

Compliance with the set maximum compensation (cap)

The maximum compensation limit (cap) is set at € 12 million for each Management Board member. This is based on the actual
expense and/or actual disbursement of the compensation awarded for a financial year. The base salaries are fixed amounts.
The expenses for fringe benefits vary from Management Board Member to Management Board Member in any given year.
The contribution to Deutsche Bank’s pension plan or pension allowance is set at the same amount for all Management Board
members. However, the amount to be recognized by the Bank during the year for Deutsche Bank’s pension service costs
fluctuates based on actuarial variables. As the expense amount for the multi-year variable compensation components of the
STA and LTA are not determined until up to seven years due to the deferral periods, compliance with the maximum
compensation set for the 2021 financial year can only be conclusively reported within the framework of the Compensation
Reports for the financial years up to 2029. Compliance with the maximum compensation limit as defined under Section 87a
of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG) is, however, already ensured for the 2021 financial year.



                                                                                                                        385
Deutsche Bank                                     Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Deferrals and holding periods
The Remuneration Ordinance for Institutions (InstitutsVergV) generally stipulates a three-year assessment period for the
determination of the variable compensation for Management Board members. Deutsche Bank complies with this requirement
by assessing each of the objectives of the LTA over a three-year period. If the relevant three years cannot be attributed to a
member of the Management Board due to that member having joined the Bank only recently, the achievement level for the
objectives will be determined for the period that can be attributed to the member. The deferral period for the LTA is in principle
five years. If the assessment period is shorter than the prescribed minimum, the deferral period of the variable compensation
to be granted is extended by the number of years missing for the minimum assessment period. The STA has an assessment
period of one year. The deferral period for the STA is in principle seven years.

The LTA is granted in the form of a share-based instrument (Restricted Equity Awards (REAs)). The disbursement takes place
over a deferral period of 5 years in 4 tranches, beginning with a tranche of 40 % in year 2 after the end of the performance
period and 3 tranches of 20 % in years 3, 4, and 5 after the end of the performance period. After the deferral period, the REAs
of each tranche are also subject to an additional holding period of one year. Accordingly, the Management Board members
cannot dispose of the shares underlying the REAs until after 3 years, at the earliest, and in full until after 6 years. Durin g the
deferral and holding periods, the value of the REAs is linked to the performance of the Deutsche Bank share and is therefore
tied to the long-term performance of the Bank, and thereby strengthens the alignment of the Management Board members’
incentives with Deutsche Bank’s performance.

The STA is generally granted in the form of deferred cash compensation (restricted incentive awards - RIAs). It is paid out in
four tranches of 25 % each over a total period of seven years after 1, 3, 5 and 7 years after the end of the assessment period.
However, if the STA accounts for more than 50 % of the total variable compensation, the portion exceeding 50 % is also
granted in the form of restricted equity awards. This ensures that at least 50 % of the total variable compensation is always
granted in share-based form in accordance with the regulatory requirements. The portion exceeding 50 % is subject to the
same deferral rules as the share-based compensation from the LTA.

Instead of receiving Restricted Equity Awards and Restricted Incentive Awards as described above, holders of specific
functions at certain Deutsche Bank U.S. entities are required by applicable regulation to be compensated under different plans.
Restricted compensation for these persons consist of restricted share awards and restricted cash awards. The recipient will
be the beneficial owner of the awards from the Award Date and the awards will be held on the recipient’s behalf. These awards
will be restricted for a period of time (subject to the applicable plan rules and award statements, including performance
conditions and forfeiture provisions). The restriction period is aligned with retention periods applicable to Deutsche Bank´s
usual deferred awards. With regard to the Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG, these rules apply to Christiana Riley
due to her role as CEO of Deutsche Bank USA Corp.

For the RIAs and REAs, specific forfeiture conditions apply during the deferral and holding periods (additional information is
provided in the section “Backtesting, malus and clawback").




                                                                                                                             386
Deutsche Bank                                     Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Backtesting, malus and clawback
By granting compensation components in a deferred form spread out over several years, a long-term incentive is created. In
addition, the individual tranches are subject to specific forfeiture conditions until they vest.

The Supervisory Board regularly reviews the results achieved by Management Board members in the past are sustainable
(backtesting). If the outcome is that the achievements rewarded by the granting of the variable compensation were not
sustainable, the awards may be partially or fully forfeited.

Also, if the Group’s results are negative, previously granted variable compensation may be declared fully or partially forfeited
during the deferral period. In addition, the awards may be fully or partially forfeited if specific solvency or liquidity con ditions
are not met. Furthermore, awards may be forfeited in whole or in part in the event of individual misconduct (including breaches
of regulations), dismissal for cause or negative individual contributions to performance (malus).

In addition, the contracts of the Management Board members also enable the Supervisory Board to reclaim already paid or
delivered compensation components due to certain individual negative performance contributions by the Management Board
member (clawback) in accordance with the provisions pursuant to Sections 18 (5) and 20 (6) of the Remuneration Ordinance
for Institutions (InstitutsVergV). The clawback is possible for the entire variable compensation for a financial year until the end
of two years after the end of the deferral period of the last tranche of the compensation elements awarded on a deferred basis
for the respective financial year.

The Supervisory Board regularly reviews in due time before the respective due dates the possibility of a full or partial forfeiture
(malus) or reclaiming (clawback) of the Management Board members’ variable compensation components. In the 2021
financial year, the Supervisory Board made use of the possibility to partially declare the forfeiture of variable compensation
and, at its meeting on February 3, 2021, resolved that a portion of the variable compensation granted to a former member of
the Management Board on March 1, 2019, in the form of Restricted Incentive Awards, is to be forfeited.


Information on shares and fulfilling the share ownership obligation (Shareholding
Guidelines)
All members of the Management Board are required to acquire a significant amount of Deutsche Bank shares and to hold
them on a long-term basis. This requirement is meant to foster the identification of the Management Board members with
Deutsche Bank and its shareholders and to ensure a long-term link to the development of the Deutsche Bank’s business.

For the Chief Executive Officer, the number of shares to be held is equal to 200 % of his annual gross base salary, and for
the other Management Board members, 100 % of their annual base salary. The requirements of the shareholding obligation
must first be fulfilled on the date on which the share-based variable compensation that has been granted to the Management
Board member since his or her appointment to the Management Board (waiting period) in total corresponds to 1.33 times the
shareholding obligation. Compliance with the requirements is reviewed semi-annually. If the required number of shares is not
met, the Management Board members must correct any deficiencies by the next review.

In the context of granting variable compensation, the Supervisory Board can resolve on an individual basis that not only the
LTA but also parts of the STA or the STA as a whole may be awarded in shares until the shareholding obligation is fulfilled.
This will ensure faster compliance with the shareholding obligation.

Members of the Management Board
The following table shows the number of outstanding share awards of the current Management Board members as of
February 19, 2021 and February 11, 2022 as well as the number of share awards newly granted, delivered or forfeited in this
period.




                                                                                                                               387
Deutsche Bank                                                          Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                     Application of the compensation system in the financial year




                                                                                 Balance as of                                                                                  Balance as of
Members of the Management Board                                                  Feb 19, 2021                Granted              Delivered                  Forfeited          Feb 11, 2022
Christian Sewing                                                                      485,115              208,115                      –                           –              693,230
Karl von Rohr                                                                         392,851              153,343                 26,356                           –              519,839
Fabrizio Campelli                                                                     278,603              145,836                 85,540                           –              338,899
Bernd Leukert                                                                          25,309              136,115                 10,124                           –              151,300
Stuart Lewis                                                                          348,142              134,859                      –                           –              483,001
James von Moltke                                                                      430,513              145,836                 11,884                           –              564,465
Alexander von zur Mühlen                                                              251,256              103,422                 76,397                           –              278,282
Christiana Riley                                                                      215,841              134,8591               102,3542                          –              248,3453
Rebecca Short4                                                                              –                    –                      –                           –               92,754
Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon                                                                 31,740              130,329                 12,696                           –              149,373
1
    Under the underlying plan, the 134,859 restricted shares originally granted were taxed at the time of grant, with 70,917 shares remaining on an after-tax basis. We refer to the
    corresponding presentation in the chapter "Deferral and retention periods".
2
    Included are 63,942 share awards delivered to cover the amount of tax due under the underlying plan (see footnote 1).
3
    Includes a net number of 70,917 share entitlements under the underlying plan (see footnote 1).
4
    Member since 1 May 2021.


The table below shows the total number of Deutsche Bank shares held by the incumbent Management Board members as of
the reporting dates February 19, 2021, and February 11, 2022 as well as the number of share-based awards and the fulfillment
level for the shareholding obligation.

                                                                                                                                                                  as of February 11, 2022
                                                                                                 thereof 75 % of
                                                                                               Restricted Equity          Total value of
                                                                                                       Award(s)/         Deutsche Bank
                                                                         Restricted Equity           Outstanding             shares and
                                                                                 Award(s)/           Equity Units      Restricted Equity
                                       Number of                              Outstanding          chargeable to               Award(s)/          Share
                                        Deutsche                              Equity Units      share obligation           Outstanding         retention             Level of
                                      Bank shares       Number of           (deferred with         (deferred with           Equity Units      obligation            required
                                         (in Units)      Deutsche                additional            additional         chargeable to         must be        shareholding        Fulfillment
Members of the Management                     as of    Bank shares       retention period)     retention period)        share obligation         fulfilled        obligation              ratio
Board                                Feb 19, 2021         (in Units)              (in Units)            (in Units)             (in Units)      Yes / No           (in Units)1           (in %)
Christian Sewing                         163,665          192,000               693,230               519,923                 711,923                No            500,069            142 %
Karl von Rohr                             17,283           30,058               519,839               389,879                 419,937               Yes            208,362            202 %
Fabrizio Campelli                         86,303          132,010               338,899               254,174                 386,184                No            166,690            232 %
Bernd Leukert                              1,500            7,882               151,300               113,475                 121,357                No            166,690             73 %
Stuart Lewis                             174,434          174,434               483,001               362,251                 536,685               Yes            194,471            276 %
James von Moltke                          68,486           74,753               564,465               423,349                 498,102               Yes            194,471            256 %
Alexander von zur Mühlen                 270,333          320,829               278,282               208,712                 529,541                No            166,690            318 %
Christiana Riley                          55,082           82,504               248,345               186,259                 268,763                No            166,690            161 %
Rebecca Short2                                 0           36,451                92,754                69,566                 106,017                No            166,690             64 %
Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon                         0                0               149,373               112,030                 112,030                No            166,690             67 %
Total                                    837,086        1,050,921             3,519,488             2,639,616               3,690,537
1
    The calculation of the total value of the Deutsche Bank shares and share awards / outstanding shares eligible for the shareholding requirements is based on the share price
    € 14,3980 (Xetra closing price on February 11, 2022).
2
    Member since May 1, 2021.


All Management Board members fulfilled the shareholding obligations in 2021 or are currently in the waiting period.

The Chairman of the Management Board, Mr. Sewing, voluntarily committed to invest 15 % of his monthly net salary in
Deutsche Bank shares from September 2019 until the end of December 2022. In each case, purchases take place on the
22nd day of each month or on the following trading day.


Benefits as of the end of the mandate
Benefits upon regular contract termination

The Supervisory Board allocates an entitlement to pension plan benefits to the Management Board members. These
entitlements involve a defined contribution pension plan. Under this pension plan, a personal pension account is set up for
each participating member of the Management Board with effect from the start of office as a Management Board member.

The members of the Management Board, including the Management Board Chairman, receive a uniform, contractually
defined, fixed annual contribution amount of € 650,000. The contribution accrues interest that is credited in advance and
determined by means of an age-related factor, up to the age of 60. For entitlements from a first-time or renewed appointment
starting from the 2021 financial year, interest accrues at an average rate of 2 % per annum, for legacy entitlements 4 %. From
the age of 61 onwards, an additional contribution equal to the amount resulting from applying the above interest rate to the
balance of the pension account as of December 31 of the previous year will be credited to the pension account. The annual
contributions, taken together, form the pension capital amount available to pay the future pension benefits upon the occurrence
of a pension event (retirement age, disability or death). The pension account balance is vested from the start.



                                                                                                                                                                                        388
Deutsche Bank                                                    Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                               Application of the compensation system in the financial year




If a Management Board member is subject to non-German income tax, the granting of an annual pension allowance of
€ 650,000 may be selected as an alternative to the defined-contribution pension plan entitlement. This is subject to the
precondition that receiving the customary pension plan contributions entails not insignificant tax-related disadvantages for the
Management Board member compared to receiving a pension allowance. This option can be exercised once and from then
on applies to the entire term of office of the Management Board member.

The following table shows the annual contributions, the interest credits, the account balances and the annual service costs for
the years 2021 and 2020 as well as the corresponding defined benefit obligations for each member of the Management Board
in office in 2021 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021. The different balances are attributable to the different
lengths of service on the Management Board, the respective age-related factors, and the different contribution rates.

                                                                                                                                                 Present value of the
                                                                                                                                                      defined benefit
Members of the                        Annual contribution,               Interest credit,         Account balance,     Service cost (IFRS),        obligation (IFRS),
Management Board                               in the year                   in the year               end of year              in the year               end of year
in €                                   2021         2020          2021             2020         2021         2020       2021         2020         2021         2020
Christian Sewing                    773,500      936,000             0                 0    6,516,000   5,742,500    701,494      936,063     6,263,328    5,816,960
Karl von Rohr                       754,000      786,500             0                 0    4,721,001   3,967,001    772,131      831,427     4,866,754    4,205,087
Fabrizio Campelli                 1,007,500     1,046,500            0                 0    2,234,918   1,227,418    906,767     1,008,742    2,091,609    1,224,209
Bernd Leukert                       812,500     1,135,334            0                 0    1,947,834   1,135,334    785,526      851,694     1,957,432    1,181,299
Stuart Lewis                        754,000      786,500             0                 0    6,411,938   5,657,938    756,618      818,838     6,919,079    6,358,878
James von Moltke                    871,000      903,500             0                 0    4,189,250   3,318,250    820,820      895,972     4,095,605    3,385,498
Alexander von zur Mühlen1                 0             0            0                 0           0            0           0            0           0             0
Christiana Riley1                         0             0            0                 0           0            0           0            0           0             0
Rebecca Short2                      554,668             0            0                 0     554,668            0    476,303             0     496,829             0
Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon              871,000     1,293,501            0                 0    2,164,501   1,293,501    824,015      903,039     2,128,664    1,335,674
Frank Kuhnke3                       812,500      845,000             0                 0    2,528,500   1,716,000    799,956      867,588     2,500,385    1,759,798
1
    The Management Board member receives a pension allowance, which is shown in the chapter "Compensation granted and owed (inflow table)”.
2
    Member since May 1, 2021.
3
    Member until April 30, 2021.



Benefits upon early termination
The Management Board members are in principle entitled to receive a severance payment upon an early termination of their
appointment, provided the Bank is not entitled to revoke the appointment or give notice under the contractual agreement for
cause. In accordance with the recommendation of the German Corporate Governance Code, the severance payment amounts
to up to two times the annual compensation at the maximum and must not exceed the amount that would be payable as
compensation for the remaining term of the service contract. The calculation of the severance payment is based on the annual
compensation for the previous financial year and, if applicable, on the expected annual compensation for the current financial
year. The severance payment is determined and granted in accordance with the statutory and regulatory requirements, in
particular with the provisions of the Remuneration Ordinance for Institutions (InstitutsVergV).

Frank Kuhnke left the Management Board with effect from the end of April 30, 2021. As foreseen in his service contract,
severance benefits were agreed with him. The severance agreement provided for compensation for a non-compete clause
(“Karenzentschädigung”) in line with his service contract in the amount of € 1,560,000 as well as a severance payment as
compensation for the early termination of his service contract in the amount of € 1,902,111.33. The first installment of 20 %
amount was disbursed in April 2021 as a cash payment. Another installment equivalent to 20 % was awarded in shares and
is due for delivery on June 1, 2022. A further installment of 30 % was awarded as deferred cash compensation with a holding
period until June 1, 2026. A final installment of 30 % was awarded as deferred compensation in shares with a holding period
until June 1, 2027. The severance payment, is subject to all contractually agreed provisions on variable compensation
components, including the possibility of a clawback of variable compensation.

In the event of a change of control, Management Board members have a special right to termination of their service contract.
However, in such case, there is no entitlement to a severance payment.




                                                                                                                                                               389
Deutsche Bank                                  Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                             Application of the compensation system in the financial year




Other service contract provisions
Term of the service contract

The term of the Management Board service contracts is linked to the duration of the appointment and is a maximum of five
years in accordance with Section 84 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). The Supervisory Board shall decide at an
early stage, no later than six months before the expiry of the appointment period, on a renewed appointment. In the case of
the Management Board member’s reappointment, the service contract is extended for the duration of a renewed appointment.

For first-time appointments, a contract term of three years is not to be exceeded. The Management Board service contract
ends automatically with the expiry of the appointment period without requiring the express notice of termination.

Reduction of base salary regarding compensation from other mandates

The employment contracts of the Management Board members contain an obligation of the members to ensure that they will
not receive any compensation to which they would otherwise be entitled in their capacity as a member of any corporate body,
in particular a supervisory board, advisory board or similar body of any group entity of the Bank pursuant to § 18 Stock
Corporation Act. Accordingly, Management Board members do not receive any compensation for mandates on boards of
Deutsche Bank subsidiaries.

A Management Board member’s base salary will be reduced in an amount equal to 50 % of the compensation from a mandate
– in particular supervisory board or advisory board mandates – at a company that does not belong to Deutsche Bank Group.
There is no such deduction of any compensation that does not exceed € 100,000 per mandate and calendar year.

In the 2021 financial year, the base salary of one member of the Management Board was reduced by the amount of the
compensation from one mandate at a company that does not belong to Deutsche Bank Group, since the compensation
exceeded the threshold amount.

Post-contractual non-compete clause

After their resignation from the Management Board, the members are as a general rule subject to a one-year non-compete
clause. During the non-compete period, Deutsche Bank pays the Management Board member compensation (waiting
allowance “Karenzentschädigung”) amounting to 65 % of his or her annual base salary. The waiting allowance shall be credited
against any claim for severance pay. In addition, the waiting allowance will be reduced by any income that the Management
Board member earns during the non-compete period from self-employed, salaried or other paid activities that are not subject
to the non-compete clause. Deutsche Bank may waive a Management Board member’s compliance with the post-contractual
non-compete clause. From the date of the waiver. If and when such waiver is granted, Deutsche Bank’s obligation to pay the
waiting allowance (“Karenzentschädigung”) ends.


Deviations from the compensation system
There were no deviations from the compensation system in the 2021 financial year.




                                                                                                                      390
Deutsche Bank                                                         Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                    Management Board compensation 2021




Management Board compensation 2021
Current Management Board members
Total compensation 2021

The Supervisory Board determined the aforementioned compensation on an individual basis for 2021 and 2020 as follows:

                                                                                                                                                           2021               2020
                                                           Base         Short Term          Long Term              Total         Target Total              Ratio            Total
in €                                                      salary1           Award               Award       compensation       compensation            to Target    compensation2
Christian Sewing                                    3,600,000          3,065,400          2,147,048          8,812,448          9,000,000                 98 %         7,368,045
Karl von Rohr                                       3,000,000          2,393,600          1,749,447          7,143,047          7,400,000                 97 %         5,882,495
Fabrizio Campelli                                   2,400,000          2,218,783          1,630,166          6,248,949          6,500,000                 96 %         5,179,137
Bernd Leukert                                       2,400,000          2,161,383          1,630,166          6,191,549          6,500,000                 95 %         4,909,270
Stuart Lewis                                        2,800,000          2,258,200          1,669,926          6,728,126          7,000,000                 96 %         4,979,403
James von Moltke                                    2,800,000          2,278,500          1,669,926          6,748,426          7,000,000                 96 %         5,262,470
Alexander von zur Mühlen                            2,400,000          2,132,000          1,630,166          6,162,166          6,500,000                 95 %         2,094,333
Christiana Riley                                    2,400,000          2,162,750          1,630,166          6,192,916          6,500,000                 95 %         4,779,103
Rebecca Short3                                      1,600,000          1,440,467          1,086,777          4,127,244          4,333,333                 95 %                 –
Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon                              2,400,000          2,134,050          1,630,166          6,164,216          6,500,000                 95 %         2,124,126
Frank Kuhnke4                                         800,000            634,133            543,389          1,977,522          2,166,667                 91 %         4,760,403
Total                                              26,600,000         22,879,266         17,017,343         66,496,609         69,400,000                 96 %        47,338,785
1
    In the column "Basic salary", the target values set by the Supervisory Board are shown in EUR for reasons of comparability. The actual inflow differs from this target value for
    Management Board members Alexander von zur Mühlen and Christiana Riley due to currency fluctuations and for Bernd Leukert due to the offsetting of compensation from
    mandates. The inflow is shown in the chapter " Compensation granted and owed (inflow table).
2
    For the Management Board members Alexander von zur Mühlen and Christiana Riley, currency fluctuations were excluded for reasons of comparability.
3
    Member since May 1, 2021.
4
    Member until April 30, 2021.


The number of share awards granted to the members of the Management Board in the form of Restricted Equity Awards
(REA) in 2022 for the 2021 financial year was calculated by dividing the respective amounts in euro by the higher of either the
average Xetra closing price of the Deutsche Bank share during the last ten trading days in February 2022 or the Xetra closing
price on February 28, 2022 (€ 12.8930).

                                                                                                                                                             Restricted Equity
                                                                                                                                                                      Award(s)
                                                                                                                                                      (deferred with additional
                                                                                                                                                              retention period)
Members of the Management Board                                                                                                                                      (in Units)1
Christian Sewing                                                                                                                                                        202,143
Karl von Rohr                                                                                                                                                           160,670
Fabrizio Campelli                                                                                                                                                       149,265
Bernd Leukert                                                                                                                                                           147,039
Stuart Lewis                                                                                                                                                            152,336
James von Moltke                                                                                                                                                        153,123
Alexander von zur Mühlen                                                                                                                                                145,900
Christiana Riley                                                                                                                                                        147,092
Rebecca Short2                                                                                                                                                           98,008
Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon                                                                                                                                                  145,979
Frank Kuhnke3                                                                                                                                                            45,665
Total                                                                                                                                                                 1,547,220
1
    The Restricted Equity Awards are commercially rounded for presentation purposes.
2
    Member since May 1, 2021.
3
    Member until April 30, 2021.


Granted and owed compensation (inflow table)

The following table shows the compensation paid and owed in the 2021 and 2020 financial years to incumbent members of
the Management Board in the 2021 financial year, pursuant to Section 162 (1) sentence 1 of the German Stock Corporation
Act (AktG). This involves the compensation components that were either actually paid or delivered to the individual
Management Board members within the reporting period (“paid”) or were already legally due during the reporting period but
not yet delivered (“owed”).

Besides the compensation amounts, the table additionally shows the relative proportions of fixed and variable compensation
of the total compensation pursuant to Section 162 (1) sentence 2 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG).




                                                                                                                                                                             391
Deutsche Bank                                                        Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                   Management Board compensation 2021




                                                                                                     Christian Sewing                                                 Karl von Rohr
                                                                                    2021                           2020                       2021                            2020
                                                                    in € t.         in %         in € t.           in %       in € t.         in %         in € t.            in %
Fixed compensation components:
  Base salary                                                       3,600          93 %          3,117            93 %        3,000          93 %          2,750             94 %
  Pension allowance                                                     0           0%               0             0%             0           0%               0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                      (8)1         0%               4             0%            24           1%              11              0%
Total fixed compensation                                            3,592          93 %          3,120            93 %        3,024          93 %          2,761             94 %
Variable compensation components:
  Deferred variable compensation
    thereof Restricted Incentive Awards:
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Buyout                         0            0%              0             0%             0           0%               0              0%
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Sign On                        0            0%              0             0%             0           0%               0              0%
        2019 Restricted Incentive Award for 2018                      232            6%            232             7%           169           5%             169              6%
        2020 Restricted Incentive Award for 2019                       43            1%              0             0%            43           1%               0              0%
    thereof Equity Awards:
        2017 Restricted Equity Award: Buyout                            0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
        2015 DB Equity Plan for 2014                                    0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                       0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
Total variable compensation                                           275           7%             232            7%            211          7%              169              6%
Total compensation                                                  3,867         100 %          3,352          100 %         3,235        100 %           2,930            100 %
1
    Due to the economic participation in the costs of a company car provided, which exceeds the amount of the other fringe benefits, a negative balance is to be shown for the
    financial year 2021.


                                                                                                     Fabrizio Campelli                                                Bernd Leukert
                                                                                    2021                           2020                       2021                            2020
                                                                    in € t.         in %         in € t.           in %       in € t.         in %         in € t.            in %
Fixed compensation components:
  Base salary                                                       2,400          99 %          2,200           99 %         2,3941        99 %           2,200             99 %
  Pension allowance                                                     0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                      12           0%              22            1%             25          1%               22              1%
Total fixed compensation                                            2,412         100 %          2,222          100 %         2,419        100 %           2,222            100 %
Variable compensation components:
  Deferred variable compensation
    thereof Restricted Incentive Awards:
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Buyout                           0          0%                0           0%               0         0%                 0            0%
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Sign On                          0          0%                0           0%               0         0%                 0            0%
        2019 Restricted Incentive Award for 2018                          0          0%                0           0%               0         0%                 0            0%
        2020 Restricted Incentive Award for 2019                          7          0%                0           0%               0         0%                 0            0%
    thereof Equity Awards:
        2017 Restricted Equity Award: Buyout                            0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
        2015 DB Equity Plan for 2014                                    0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                       0           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
Total variable compensation                                             7           0%               0            0%              0          0%                0              0%
Total compensation                                                  2,420         100 %          2,222          100 %         2,419        100 %           2,222            100 %
1
    The fixed compensation shown includes the crediting of compensation from mandates.



                                                                                                            Stuart Lewis                                      James von Moltke
                                                                                    2021                           2020                       2021                            2020
                                                                     in € t.         in %         in € t.          in %        in € t.        in %          in € t.           in %
Fixed compensation components:
  Base salary                                                       2,800          91 %          2,283            78 %        2,800          70 %          2,283             63 %
  Pension allowance                                                     0           0%               0             0%             0           0%               0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                      80           3%              29             1%            52           1%              43              1%
Total fixed compensation                                            2,880          94 %          2,312            79 %        2,852          71 %          2,326             64 %
Variable compensation components:
  Deferred variable compensation
    thereof Restricted Incentive Awards:
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Buyout                         0            0%              0             0%           140           3%             280              8%
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Sign On                        0            0%              0             0%            67           2%              67              2%
        2019 Restricted Incentive Award for 2018                      156            5%            156             5%           169           4%             169              5%
        2020 Restricted Incentive Award for 2019                       43            1%              0             0%            43           1%               0              0%
    thereof Equity Awards:
        2017 Restricted Equity Award: Buyout                            0           0%               0            0%            124          3%              177              5%
        2015 DB Equity Plan for 2014                                    0           0%             443           15 %             0          0%                0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                       0           0%               0            0%            616         15 %             616             17 %
Total variable compensation                                           199           6%             599           21 %         1,157         29 %           1,309             36 %
Total compensation                                                  3,079         100 %          2,912          100 %         4,009        100 %           3,635            100 %




                                                                                                                                                                             392
Deutsche Bank                                                          Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                     Management Board compensation 2021




                                                                                                Alexander von zur Mühlen                                                   Christiana Riley
                                                                                       2021                             2020                        2021                             2020
                                                                       in € t.         in %             in € t.             in %     in € t.         in %             in € t.         in %
Fixed compensation components:
  Base salary                                                         2,3451          74 %            9631             75 %         2,3281         76 %           2,1941            72 %
  Pension allowance                                                     650           21 %            271              21 %           650          21 %             650             21 %
  Fringe benefits                                                        64            2%              15               1%             85           3%               95              3%
Total fixed compensation                                              3,059           97 %          1,249              97 %         3,063          99 %           2,938             97 %
Variable compensation components:
  Deferred variable compensation
    thereof Restricted Incentive Awards:
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Buyout                             0          0%                    0              0%            0         0%                     0          0%
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Sign On                            0          0%                    0              0%            0         0%                     0          0%
        2019 Restricted Incentive Award for 2018                            0          0%                    0              0%            0         0%                     0          0%
        2020 Restricted Incentive Award for 2019                            0          0%                    0              0%            0         0%                     0          0%
    thereof Equity Awards:
        2017 Restricted Equity Award: Buyout                              0           0%                0              0%                0          0%                 0              0%
        2015 DB Equity Plan for 2014                                      0           0%                0              0%                0          0%                 0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                        98           3%               33              3%               17          1%                96              3%
Total variable compensation                                              98           3%               33              3%               17          1%                96              3%
Total compensation                                                    3,157         100 %           1,282            100 %         0 3,079       0100 %          0 3,034           0100 %
                                                                     0              0              0                 0
1
    As the fixed compensation is granted in local currency, it is subject to FX-rate changes.



                                                                            Rebecca Short (Member since May 1, 2021)                                            Prof. Dr. Stefan Simon
                                                                                       2021                             2020                        2021                             2020
                                                                       in € t.         in %             in € t.             in %     in € t.         in %             in € t.         in %
Fixed compensation components:
  Base salary                                                         1,600         100 %                    -                 -    2,400          98 %           1,000             99 %
  Pension allowance                                                       0           0%                     -                 -        0           0%                0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                         6           0%                     -                 -       46           2%                7              1%
Total fixed compensation                                              1,606         100 %                    -                 -    2,446         100 %           1,007            100 %
Variable compensation components:
  Deferred variable compensation
    thereof Restricted Incentive Awards:
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Buyout                             0          0%                    -                 -          0         0%                     0          0%
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Sign On                            0          0%                    -                 -          0         0%                     0          0%
        2019 Restricted Incentive Award for 2018                            0          0%                    -                 -          0         0%                     0          0%
        2020 Restricted Incentive Award for 2019                            0          0%                    -                 -          0         0%                     0          0%
    thereof Equity Awards:                                                                                                     -
        2017 Restricted Equity Award: Buyout                              0           0%                     -                 -        0           0%                0              0%
        2015 DB Equity Plan for 2014                                      0           0%                     -                 -        0           0%                0              0%
  Fringe benefits                                                         0           0%                     -                 -        0           0%                0              0%
Total variable compensation                                               0           0%                     -                 -        0           0%                0              0%
Total compensation                                                    1,606         100 %                    -                 -    2,446         100 %           1,007            100 %



                                                                                                                                           Frank Kuhnke (Member until April 30, 2021)
                                                                                                                                       2021                                          2020
                                                                                                                  in € t.               in %                in € t.                   in %
Fixed compensation components:
  Base salary                                                                                                       800               35 %                  2,200                  100 %
  Severance benefits1                                                                                             1,420               63 %                      0                       -
  Pension allowance                                                                                                   0                0%                       0                    0%
  Fringe benefits                                                                                                     1                0%                       7                    0%
Total fixed compensation                                                                                          2,221               98 %                  2,207                  100 %
Variable compensation components:
  Deferred variable compensation
    thereof Restricted Incentive Awards:
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Buyout                                                                       0                 0%                       0                    0%
        2017 Restricted Incentive Award: Sign On                                                                      0                 0%                       0                    0%
        2019 Restricted Incentive Award for 2018                                                                      0                 0%                       0                    0%
        2020 Restricted Incentive Award for 2019                                                                     43                 2%                       0                    0%
    thereof Equity Awards:
        2017 Restricted Equity Award: Buyout                                                                          0               0%                        0                    0%
        2015 DB Equity Plan for 2014                                                                                  0               0%                        0                    0%
  Fringe benefits                                                                                                     0               0%                        0                    0%
Total variable compensation                                                                                          43               2%                        0                    0%
Total compensation                                                                                                2,264             100 %                   2,207                  100 %
1
    For details to the severance benefits, please refer to chapter “Benefits upon early termination”.




                                                                                                                                                                                     393
Deutsche Bank                                                     Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                                                Management Board compensation 2021




With respect to the deferred compensation components of previous years approved in the reporting year, the Supervisory
Board confirmed that the respective performance conditions were met.


Former members of the Management Board
Granted and owed compensation (inflow table)

The following table shows the compensation paid and owed to the former members of the Management Board in the 2021
financial year pursuant to Section 162 (1) sentence 1 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). This involves the
compensation components that were either actually delivered to the former Management Board members within the reporting
period (“paid”) or were already legally due during the reporting period but not yet delivered (“owed”). Pursuant to Section 162
(5) of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG), no personal data is provided on former members of the Management Board
who ended their work for the Management Board before December 31, 2011.

                                                        Werner Steinmüller               Sylvie Matherat                    Garth Ritchie                     Frank Strauß
                                                   Member until July 31, 2020   Member until July 31, 2019     Member until July 31, 2019        Member until July 31, 2019
                                                                        2021                         2021                                2021                         2021
                                                       in € t.          in %        in € t.          in %          in € t.               in %         in € t.         in %
Severance benefits                                       130             4%              0            0%           1,639                79 %               0           0%
Deferred variable compensation
     Restricted Incentive Awards                         191            6%            186          88 %              432                 21 %              326     100 %
     Equity Awards                                         0            0%              0           0%                 0                  0%                 0       0%
Fringe benefits                                          130            4%             26          12 %                0                  0%                 0       0%
Pension benefits                                       2,6661          86 %             0           0%                 0                  0%                 0       0%
Total compensation                                     3,117          100 %           211         100 %            2,071                100 %              326     100 %
1
    The shown value represents capital payments.



                                                                                                                                                           Nicolas Moreau
                                                                                                                                                  Member until Dec 31, 2018
                                                                                                                                                                       2021
                                                                                                                         DWS
                                                                                                                   Management
                                                                                                    DB AG               GmbH                      Overall
                                                                                                     in € t.                  in € t.              in € t.              in %
Deferred variable compensation
     Restricted Incentive Awards                                                                        79                      90                   169              57 %
     Equity Awards1                                                                                      0                     130                   130              43 %
Fringe benefits                                                                                          0                       0                     0               0%
Pension benefits                                                                                         0                       0                     0               0%
Total compensation                                                                                      79                     220                   299             100 %
1
    The equity awards shown are share-based instruments granted by DWS Management GmbH. Details of these instruments can be found in the DWS Annual Report.




                                                       Kimberly Hammonds             Dr. Marcus Schenck                        John Cryan          Hermann-Josef Lamberti
                                                   Member until May 24, 2018    Member until May 24, 2018        Member until April 8, 2018      Member until May 31, 2012
                                                                        2021                         2021                                 2021                        2021
                                                        in € t.         in %         in € t.         in %           in € t.              in %          in € t.        in %
Deferred variable compensation
     Restricted Incentive Awards                           52          42 %             65         100 %               47               100 %              0          0%
     Equity Awards                                          0           0%               0           0%                 0                 0%               0          0%
Fringe benefits                                            73          59 %              0           0%                 0                 0%               0          0%
Pension benefits                                            0           0%               0           0%                 0                 0%           1,414        100 %
Total compensation                                        124         100 %             65         100 %               47               100 %          1,414        100 %




                                                                                                                                                         Josef Ackermann
                                                                                                                                                 Member until May 31, 2012
                                                                                                                                                                      2021
                                                                                                                                                 in € t.              in %
Deferred variable compensation
     Restricted Incentive Awards                                                                                                                     0               0%
     Equity Awards                                                                                                                                   0               0%
Fringe benefits                                                                                                                                      0               0%
Pension benefits                                                                                                                                   924             100 %
Total compensation                                                                                                                                 924             100 %




                                                                                                                                                                       394
Deutsche Bank                                   Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                              Outlook for the 2022 financial year




Outlook for the 2022 financial year
Planned changes on the Management Board
Stuart Lewis will resign as member of the Management Board and Chief Risk Officer according to plan with effect from the
day of the General Meeting on May 19, 2022. The appointment of his successor, Olivier Vigneron, takes place with effect
from May 20, 2022. Olivier Vigneron will initially work for Deutsche Bank as Senior Group Director
(Generalbevollmächtigter), starting as of March 1, 2022. As a result, a smooth transition of tasks and responsibilities of the
Chief Risk Officer can be secured. The Management Board will thus continue to comprise 10 members.


Total target compensation and maximum compensation
The Supervisory Board has decided that the total target compensation for 2022 will in principle remain unchanged compared
to 2021. The total target compensation for the new board member Olivier Vigneron in his future function as Chief Risk Officer
will be € 6,500,000 in line with the compensation of other Management Board members with responsibility for an infrastructure
area (except for the CFO and the current CRO). This sum consists of a basic salary of € 2,400,000 gross and a target variable
compensation of € 4,100,000 gross. The maximum variable compensation is € 6,150,000 gross.

The limits on compensation for the members of the Management Board remain unchanged versus the 2021 financial year.
This means that the maximum possible achievement level for variable compensation amounts to 150 %, and there is a cap at
€ 9.85 million that limits the sum of base salary, STA and LTA. In addition, in accordance with Section 87a (1) sentence 2
No. 1 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG), the limit set for total compensation is maintained unchanged at € 12 million
uniformly for all members of the Management board as the maximum cap based on the financial year.


Targets and objectives for 2022
The structure of the targets and objectives and the individual components of Management Board compensation applied in
2022 will be in line with the compensation system approved by the General Meeting.

Short-Term Award
Unchanged from 2021, the amount of the Short-Term Award for the 2022 financial year will continue to be based on the
achievement level of the short and medium-term individual and divisional objectives. It comprises three elements with different
weightings:

   – Individual Objectives (50 %)
   – Individual Balanced Scorecards (25 %)
   – Annual Priorities (25 %)

For each of these elements, an achievement level is determined for the performance year at the beginning of the following
year based on an assessment of the measurement and performance criteria set by the Supervisory Board at the beginning of
the year under review. The achievement level determines the factor for calculating the amount of the Short-Term Award for
the preceding financial year.

Long-Term Award
In 2022, when determining the variable compensation, the focus is, again, placed on the achievement of long-term objectives
linked to the strategy. The objectives and their weightings within the LTA for 2022 are unchanged compared to 2021:

   –   ESG Factor (33.33 %)
   –   Relative Total Shareholder Return (25 %)
   –   Organic Capital Growth (25 %)
   –   Group Component (16.67 %)




                                                                                                                         395
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the Management Board
Annual Report 2021                               Outlook for the 2022 financial year




The ESG matrix will be continuously and consistently developed over time in line with sustainability strategy. As announced
when the new compensation system was published in 2021, an amendment was made to an important objective in the area
of climate risk management. The disclosure of the corporate credit book carbon footprint and the setting of CO2 intensity
reduction targets for key industries will be pursued by the end of 2022 in line with the Net Zero Banking Alliance commitment.
The high importance of this objective for the bank’s sustainability strategy is reflected in a corresponding weighting within the
matrix. In the area of own business, a reduction was made to a target and thus a concentration on the permanent reduction
of building energy requirements. The importance of the ambitious roadmap to reach 35 % of women in vice president to
managing director positions by 2025 is reflected in a higher weighting within the matrix. The two corporate governance
objectives remain high in their weighting, at 50 % of the ESG factor. This underlines the importance of measures to combat
economic crime and prevent money laundering activities, as well as compliance with regulatory requirements.

The objectives of the ESG Matrix for the financial year 2022 are therefore the following:




The targets for the Relative Total Shareholder Return in relation to the average share returns of a selected peer group and for
the Organic Capital Growth remain unchanged in 2022.

The Group component will continue to consist of 4 sub-objectives in 2022. Two of them, the "Core capital ratio (CET1 ratio)"
and "Return on tangible equity (RoTE)" are unchanged compared to 2021 financial year. New objectives are the "cost-income
ratio" and a sustainable finance volume metric.




                                                                                                                           396
Deutsche Bank                                                       Compensation of members of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                                  Supervisory Board Compensation for the 2021 and 2020 financial years




Compensation of members of the Supervisory Board
Supervisory Board compensation is regulated in Section 14 of the Articles of Association, which can be amended by the
General Meeting if necessary. The compensation provisions redesigned in 2013 were last amended by resolution of the
General Meeting on May 27, 2021, and became effective on July 23, 2021. Accordingly, the following provisions apply:

The members of the Supervisory Board receive fixed annual compensation (“Supervisory Board Compensation”). The annual
base compensation amounts to € 100,000 for each Supervisory Board member. The Supervisory Board Chairman receives
twice that amount and the Deputy Chairperson one and a half times that amount.

Members and chairs of the committees of the Supervisory Board are paid additional fixed annual compensation as follows:

                                                                                                                                                                  Dec 31, 2021
Committee
in €                                                                                                                                                 Chair             Member
Audit Committee                                                                                                                                  200,000              100,000
Risk Committee                                                                                                                                   200,000              100,000
Nomination Committee                                                                                                                             100,000               50,000
Mediation Committee                                                                                                                                    0                    0
Integrity Committee                                                                                                                              200,000              100,000
Chairman’s Committee                                                                                                                             100,000               50,000
Compensation Control Committee                                                                                                                   100,000               50,000
Strategy Committee                                                                                                                               100,000               50,000
Technology, Data and Innovation Committee                                                                                                        200,000              100,000
* Starting from the entry of the amendment to the Articles of Association in the Commercial Register on July 23, 2021. Until this date, the additional fixed annual compensation
  paid for Technology, Data and Innovation Committee work in the 2021 financial year was as follows: Chair: €100,000, members: €50,000.


75 % of the compensation determined is disbursed to each Supervisory Board member after submitting invoices within the
first three month of the following year. The other 25 % is converted by the company at the same time into company shares
based on the average closing price on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (Xetra or successor system) during the last ten trading
days of the preceding January, calculated to three digits after the decimal point. The share value of this number of shares is
paid to the respective Supervisory Board member in February of the year following his departure from the Supervisory Board
or the expiration of his term of office, based on the average closing price on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (Xetra or successor
system) during the last ten trading days of the preceding January, provided that the member does not leave the Supervisory
Board due to important cause which would have justified dismissal (forfeiture regulation).

In case of a change in Supervisory Board membership during the year, compensation for the financial year will be paid on a
pro rata basis, rounded up/down to full months. For the year of departure, the entire compensation is paid in cash; a forfeiture
regulation applies to 25 % of the compensation for that financial year.

The company reimburses the Supervisory Board members for the cash expenses they incur in the performance of their office,
including any value added tax (VAT) on their compensation and reimbursements of expenses. Furthermore, any employer
contributions to social security schemes that may be applicable under foreign law to the performance of their Supervisory
Board work shall be paid for each Supervisory Board member affected. Finally, the Supervisory Board Chairman will be
reimbursed appropriately for travel expenses incurred in performing representative tasks due to his function and reimbursed
for costs for the security measures required based on his function.

In the interest of the company, the members of the Supervisory Board will be included in an appropriate amount, with a
deductible, in any financial liability insurance policy held by the company. The premiums for this are paid by the company.



Supervisory Board Compensation for the 2021 and 2020
financial years
Individual members of the Supervisory Board received the following compensation for the 2021 and 2020 financial years
(excluding value added tax). The following two tables show the compensation paid and owed to the members of the
Supervisory Board in the 2021 and 2020 financial years pursuant to Section 162 (1) sentence 1 of the German Stock
Corporation Act (AktG).




                                                                                                                                                                          397
Deutsche Bank                                                         Compensation of members of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                                    Supervisory Board Compensation for the 2021 and 2020 financial years




                                                                                                                                                Compensation for fiscal year 2021
                                                                                                                                    Total           Thereof payable in 1st quarter
Members of the Supervisory Board                                   Base salary        Compensation for Committees1
                                                                                                                             Compensation                                    2022
                                                          in €             in %                  in €             in %                  in €                 in €             in %
Dr. Paul Achleitner                                200,000               23 %             670,833               77 %             870,833               653,125              75 %
Detlef Polaschek                                   150,000               33 %             300,000               67 %             450,000               337,500              75 %
Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein                        100,000               33 %             200,000               67 %             300,000               225,000              75 %
Frank Bsirske2                                      83,333               33 %             166,667               67 %             250,000               250,000             100 %
Mayree Clark                                       100,000               22 %             350,000               78 %             450,000               337,500              75 %
Jan Duscheck                                       100,000               37 %             170,833               63 %             270,833               203,125              75 %
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck                             100,000               46 %             116,667               54 %             216,667               162,500              75 %
Sigmar Gabriel                                     100,000               50 %             100,000               50 %             200,000               150,000              75 %
Timo Heider                                        100,000               34 %             191,667               66 %             291,667               218,750              75 %
Martina Klee                                       100,000               59 %              70,833               41 %             170,833               128,125              75 %
Henriette Mark                                     100,000               40 %             150,000               60 %             250,000               187,500              75 %
Gabriele Platscher                                 100,000               33 %             200,000               67 %             300,000               225,000              75 %
Bernd Rose                                         100,000               31 %             220,833               69 %             320,833               240,625              75 %
Gerd Alexander Schütz3                              41,667               83 %               8,333               17 %              50,000                50,000             100 %
John Alexander Thain                               100,000               50 %             100,000               50 %             200,000               150,000              75 %
Michele Trogni                                     100,000               26 %             291,667               74 %             391,667               293,750              75 %
Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel                               100,000               22 %             350,000               78 %             450,000               337,500              75 %
Stefan Viertel                                     100,000               41 %             141,667               59 %             241,667               181,250              75 %
Dr. Theodor Weimer                                 100,000               50 %             100,000               50 %             200,000               150,000              75 %
Frank Werneke4                                       8,333              100 %                   0                0%                8,333                 6,250              75 %
Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann                     100,000               20 %             395,833               80 %             495,833               371,875              75 %
Frank Witter5                                       58,333               41 %              83,333               59 %             141,667               106,250              75 %
Total                                            2,141,666               33 %           4,379,166               67 %           6,520,833             4,965,625              76 %
1
    The respective memberships of the Supervisory Board committees in the 2021 financial year are presented on page 429.
2
    Member of the Supervisory Board until October 27, 2021.
3
    Member of the Supervisory Board until May 27, 2021.
4
    Member of the Supervisory Board since November 25, 2021.
5
    Member of the Supervisory Board since May 27, 2021.



                                                                                                                                                Compensation for fiscal year 2020
                                                                                                                                    Total
Members of the Supervisory Board                                   Base salary        Compensation for Committees1                                Thereof paid in 1st quarter 2021
                                                                                                                             Compensation
                                                          in €             in %                  in €             in %                  in €                 in €             in %
Dr. Paul Achleitner2                               183,333               23 %             618,750               77 %             802,083               601,563              75 %
Detlef Polaschek                                   150,000               33 %             300,000               67 %             450,000               337,500              75 %
Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein                        100,000               33 %             200,000               67 %             300,000               225,000              75 %
Frank Bsirske                                      100,000               33 %             200,000               67 %             300,000               225,000              75 %
Mayree Clark                                       100,000               24 %             325,000               76 %             425,000               318,750              75 %
Jan Duscheck                                       100,000               40 %             150,000               60 %             250,000               187,500              75 %
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck                             100,000               67 %              50,000               33 %             150,000               112,500              75 %
Sigmar Gabriel3                                     83,333               50 %              83,333               50 %             166,667               125,000              75 %
Katherine Garrett-Cox4                              41,667               42 %              58,333               58 %             100,000               100,000             100 %
Timo Heider                                        100,000               40 %             150,000               60 %             250,000               187,500              75 %
Martina Klee                                       100,000               67 %              50,000               33 %             150,000               112,500              75 %
Henriette Mark                                     100,000               40 %             150,000               60 %             250,000               187,500              75 %
Gabriele Platscher                                 100,000               33 %             200,000               67 %             300,000               225,000              75 %
Bernd Rose                                         100,000               36 %             175,000               64 %             275,000               206,250              75 %
Gerd Alexander Schütz                              100,000               57 %              75,000               43 %             175,000               131,250              75 %
Stephan Szukalski5                                 100,000               50 %             100,000               50 %             200,000               200,000             100 %
John Alexander Thain                               100,000               50 %             100,000               50 %             200,000               150,000              75 %
Michele Trogni                                     100,000               29 %             250,000               71 %             350,000               262,500              75 %
Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel                               100,000               24 %             325,000               76 %             425,000               318,750              75 %
Dr. Theodor Weimer6                                 58,333               54 %              50,000               46 %             108,333                81,250              75 %
Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann                     100,000               22 %             350,000               78 %             450,000               337,500              75 %
Total                                            2,116,666               35 %           3,960,416               65 %           6,077,083             4,632,813              76 %
1
    The respective memberships of the Supervisory Board committees in the 2020 financial year are presented on page XV of the Annual Report 2020.
2
    In the context of the discussion of a voluntary waiver by senior managers of the Bank of portions of their compensation claims, Dr. Achleitner offered to waive a portion of his
    future compensation claim equivalent to one-twelfth (€72,917) of his compensation for the 2020 financial year pursuant to the Articles of Association. The Management Board
    accepted this offer.
3
    Member of the Supervisory Board since March 11, 2020.
4
    Member of the Supervisory Board until May 20, 2020.
5
    Member of the Supervisory Board until December 31, 2020.
6
    Member of the Supervisory Board since May 20, 2020.


Following the submission of invoices 25 % of the compensation determined for each Supervisory Board member for the 2021
financial year was converted into notional shares of the company on the basis of a share price of € 11.620 (average closing
price on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (Xetra) during the last ten trading days of January 2022). Members who left the
Supervisory Board in 2021 were paid the entire amount of compensation in cash.




                                                                                                                                                                             398
Deutsche Bank                                                       Compensation of members of the Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                                  Supervisory Board Compensation for the 2021 and 2020 financial years




The following table shows the number of notional shares of the Supervisory Board members, to three digits after the decimal
point, that were awarded in the first three months 2022 as part of their 2021 compensation, and the change versus the prior
year, the number of notional shares accrued from previous years as part of the compensation, the total number of notional
shares accumulated during the respective periods of membership in the Supervisory Board, and the change versus the prior
year, as well as the total amounts paid out in February 2022 for members that left the Supervisory Board.

                                                                                                                               Number of notional shares

                                                         Converted in                              Total number
                                                        February 2022               Change              accrued                                  Change           In February
                                                         as part of the        compared to            during the                            compared to                 2022
                                                        compensation          previous year              current              Total        previous year              payable
Members of the Supervisory Board                                 2021                  in %        term of office       (cumulative)                in %                 in €¹
Dr. Paul Achleitner                                      18,735.657                 -17 %         85,709.128          104,444.785                  22 %                   0
Detlef Polaschek                                          9,681.583                 -23 %         35,228.225           44,909.808                  27 %                   0
Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein                               6,454.389                 -23 %         23,485.483           29,939.872                  27 %                   0
Frank Bsirske2                                                    0                   N/A         23,485.483           23,485.483                   0%              272,901
Mayree Clark                                              9,681.583                 -19 %         30,167.795           39,849.378                  32 %                   0
Jan Duscheck                                              5,826.879                 -17 %         19,571.236           25,398.115                  30 %                   0
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck                                    4,661.503                  11 %         13,992.360           18,653.863                  33 %                   0
Sigmar Gabriel                                            4,302.926                  -8 %          4,671.099            8,974.025                  92 %                   0
Timo Heider                                               6,275.100                 -10 %         19,571.236           25,846.336                  32 %                   0
Martina Klee                                              3,675.416                 -13 %         11,742.742           15,418.158                  31 %                   0
Henriette Mark                                            5,378.657                 -23 %         19,571.236           24,949.893                  27 %                   0
Gabriele Platscher                                        6,454.389                 -23 %         23,485.483           29,939.872                  27 %                   0
Bernd Rose                                                6,902.610                 -10 %         20,271.901           27,174.511                  34 %                   0
Gerd Alexander Schütz3                                            0                   N/A         12,443.407           12,443.407                   0%              144,592
John Alexander Thain                                      4,302.926                 -23 %         15,656.989           19,959.915                  27 %                   0
Michele Trogni                                            8,426.583                 -14 %         25,552.883           33,979.446                  33 %                   0
Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel                                      9,681.583                 -19 %         17,239.860           26,921.443                  56 %                   0
Stefan Viertel4                                           5,199.369                   N/A                  0            5,199.369                   N/A                   0
Dr. Theodor Weimer                                        4,302.926                  42 %          3,036.214            7,339.140                 142 %                   0
Frank Werneke5                                              179.289                   N/A                  0              179.289                   N/A                   0
Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann                           10,667.671                 -15 %         27,895.277           38,562.948                  38 %                   0
Frank Witter6                                             3,047.906                   N/A                  0            3,047.906                   N/A                   0
Total                                                   133,838.925                 -17 %        432,778.037          566,616.962                  31 %             417,493
1
    At a value of €11.620 based on the average closing price on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (Xetra or successor system) during the last ten trading days of January 2022.
2
    Member until October 27, 2021.
3
    Member until May 27, 2021.
4
    Member since January 1, 2021.
5
    Member since November 25, 2021.
6
    Member since May 27, 2021.


All employee representatives on the Supervisory Board, with the exception of Frank Bsirske (member until October 27, 2021),
Jan Duscheck and Frank Werneke (member since November 25, 2021), are employed by Deutsche Bank Group. In the 2021
financial year, we paid such members a total amount of € 1.29 million in the form of salary, retirement and pension
compensation in addition to their Supervisory Board compensation.

We do not provide members of the Supervisory Board with any benefits after they have left the Supervisory Board, though
members who are or were employed by us are entitled to the benefits associated with the termination of such employment.
During 2021, we set aside € 0.06 million for pension, retirement or similar benefits for the members of the Supervisory Board
who are or were employed by us.

With the agreement of the Bank’s Management Board, Dr. Paul Achleitner performs representative functions in various ways
on an unpaid basis for the Bank and participates in opportunities for referrals of business for the Bank. These tasks are related
to the functional responsibilities of the Chairman of the Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank AG. In this respect, the
reimbursement of costs is provided for in the Articles of Association. On the basis of a separate contractual agreement, the
Bank provides Dr. Paul Achleitner with infrastructure and support services free of charge for his services in the interest of the
Bank. He is therefore entitled to avail himself of internal resources for preparing and carrying out these activities. The Bank’s
security and car services are available for Dr. Paul Achleitner for use free of charge for these tasks. The Bank also reimburses
travel expenses and attendance fees and covers the taxes for any non-cash benefits provided. On September 24, 2012, the
Chairman’s Committee approved the conclusion of this agreement. The provisions apply for the duration of Dr. Paul
Achleitner’s tenure as Chairman of the Supervisory Board and are reviewed on an annual basis for appropriateness. Under
this agreement between Deutsche Bank and Dr. Achleitner, support services equivalent to € 95,000 (2020: € 135,000) were
provided and reimbursements for expenses amounting to € 209,589 (2020 € 150,290) were paid during the 2021 financial
year.




                                                                                                                                                                        399
Deutsche Bank                                    Comparative presentation of compensation and earnings trends
Annual Report 2021                               Supervisory Board Compensation for the 2021 and 2020 financial years




Comparative presentation of compensation and
earnings trends
The following table shows the comparative presentation of the change from year to year in the compensation, in the earnings
of the company and the Group as well as the average compensation of employees on a full-time equivalent basis. The
information provided pursuant to Section 162 (1) sentence 2 No. 2 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG) will be
successively expanded with the change from one financial year to the prior year until a reporting period of five years is reached.
Starting with the 2025 financial year, the year-to-year changes will be shown for each of the past five years.

The information on the compensation of the current and former members of the Management Board and Supervisory Board
reflects the individualized statement in the Compensation Report of the paid or owed compensation pursuant to Section 162
(1) sentence 2 No. 1 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). The presentation of the development of the company’s
earnings is to reflect, according to the legal requirements, those of the stand-alone listed company, i.e. Deutsche Bank AG.
Accordingly, the net income (net loss) of Deutsche Bank AG is used to present earnings within the meaning of Section 162
(1) sentence 2 No. 2 of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG). As the Management Board compensation is measured on
the basis of Group figures, the earnings figures for the Group are additionally shown for the comparative presentation. These
Group earnings figures are net income (net loss), cost-income ratio and Return on Tangible Equity (RoTE). For the group of
employees for the comparison, the data relevant for Deutsche Bank Group were used in light of Deutsche Bank’s global
workforce. The group of employees for the comparison comprises all of the employees worldwide of Deutsche Bank Group.




                                                                                                                            400
Deutsche Bank                                                      Comparative presentation of compensation and earnings trends
Annual Report 2021                                                 Supervisory Board Compensation for the 2021 and 2020 financial years




                                                                                                                                                           Annual change
                                                                                                                                                               from 2020
                                                                                                                           2021                 2020                 in %
1. Company profit development
   Net income (net loss) of Deutsche Bank AG (in € bn)                                                                    1,961                (1,769)               N/M
   Net income (net loss) of Deutsche Bank Group (in € bn)                                                                 2,365                   495                N/M
   Cost-income ratio of Deutsche Bank Group (in %)                                                                       84.6 %               88.3 %                   (4)
   Return on Tangible Equity (RoTE) of Deutsche Bank Group (in %)                                                         3.8 %                 0.2 %                N/M
2. Average compensation employees
   World-wide on a full-time equivalent basis1                                                                         118,477               118,765                   (0)
3. Management Board compensation (in € tsd.)
   Current Management Board members
   Christian Sewing                                                                                                       3,867                 3,352                 15
   Karl von Rohr                                                                                                          3,235                 2,930                 10
   Fabrizio Campelli                                                                                                      2,420                 2,222                  9
   Bernd Leukert                                                                                                          2,419                 2,222                  9
   Stuart Lewis                                                                                                           3,079                 2,912                  6
   James von Moltke                                                                                                       4,009                 3,635                 10
   Alexander von zur Mühlen (Member since August 1, 2020)                                                                 3,157                 1,282                146
   Christiana Riley                                                                                                       3,079                 3,034                  1
   Rebecca Short (Member since May 1, 2021)                                                                               1,606                     -                N/M
   Stefan Simon (Member since August 1, 2020)                                                                             2,446                 1,007                143
   Members who left the Management Board during the financial year
   Frank Kuhnke (Member until 30 April 2021)                                                                              2,264                 2,207                  3
   Members who left the Management Board before the financial year
   Werner Steinmüller (Member until July 31, 2020)                                                                        3,117                 2,436                 28
   Sylvie Matherat (Member until July 31, 2019)                                                                             211                   910                (77)
   Garth Ritchie (Member until July 31, 2019)                                                                             2,071                 2,809                (26)
   Frank Strauß (Member until July 31, 2019)                                                                                326                 2,168                (85)
   Nicolas Moreau (Member until Dec 31, 2018)                                                                               299                 1,826                (84)
   Kimberly Hammonds (Member until May 24, 2018)                                                                            124                    52                138
   Dr. Marcus Schenck (Member until May 24, 2018)                                                                            65                    65                  −
   John Cryan (Member until April 8, 2018)                                                                                   47                    47                  −
   Hermann-Josef Lamberti (Member until May 31, 2012)                                                                     1,414                 1,450                 (2)
   Josef Ackermann (Member until May 31, 2012)                                                                              924                   911                  1
4. Supervisory Board compensation (in € tsd.)
   Current Supervisory Board members
   Dr. Paul Achleitner                                                                                                      871                   802                  9
   Detlef Polaschek                                                                                                         450                   450                  −
   Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein                                                                                              300                   300                  −
   Mayree Clark                                                                                                             450                   425                  6
   Jan Duscheck                                                                                                             271                   250                  8
   Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck                                                                                                   217                   150                 44
   Sigmar Gabriel (Member since March 11, 2020)                                                                             200                   167                 20
   Timo Heider                                                                                                              292                   250                 17
   Martina Klee                                                                                                             171                   150                 14
   Henriette Mark                                                                                                           250                   250                  −
   Gabriele Platscher                                                                                                       300                   300                  −
   Bernd Rose                                                                                                               321                   275                 17
   John Alexander Thain                                                                                                     200                   200                  −
   Michele Trogni                                                                                                           392                   350                 12
   Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel                                                                                                     450                   425                  6
   Stefan Viertel (Member since January 1, 2021)                                                                            242                     -                N/M
   Dr. Theodor Weimer (Member since May 20, 2020)                                                                           200                   108                 85
   Frank Werneke (Member since November 25, 2021)                                                                             8                     -                N/M
   Prof. Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann                                                                                           496                   450                 10
   Frank Witter (Member since May 27, 2021)                                                                                 142                     -                N/M
   Former Members of the Supervisory Board
   Frank Bsirske (Member until October 27, 2021)                                                                            250                   300                 (17)
   Gerd Alexander Schütz (Member until May 27, 2021)                                                                         50                   175                 (71)
   Stephan Szukalski (Member until December 31, 2020)                                                                         -                   200                N/M
   Katherine Garrett-Cox (Member until May 20, 2020)                                                                          -                   100                N/M
1
    The average compensation of employees is determined by the total compensation of the year divided by the number of employees (full-time equivalent).




                                                                                                                                                                    401
Deutsche Bank                                   Independent auditor’s report
Annual Report 2021




Independent auditor’s report
To Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main

We have audited the attached remuneration report of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, Frankfurt am Main, prepared to
comply with Sec. 162 AktG [“Aktiengesetz”: German Stock Corporation Act] for the fiscal year from 1. January 2021 to 31.
December 2021 and the related disclosures.


Responsibilities of the executive directors and the supervisory board
The executive directors and supervisory board of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft are responsible for the preparation of the
remuneration report and the related disclosures in compliance with the requirements of Sec. 162 AktG. In addition, the
executive directors and supervisory board are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable
the preparation of a remuneration report and the related disclosures that are free from material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error.


Auditor’s responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on this remuneration report and the related disclosures based on our audit. We
conducted our audit in compliance with German Generally Accepted Standards for Financial Statement Audits promulgated
by the Institut der Wirtschaftsprüfer [Institute of Public Auditors in Germany] (IDW). Those standards require that we comply
with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the remuneration
report and the related disclosures are free from material misstatement.

An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts in the remuneration report and the related
disclosures. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material
misstatement of the remuneration report and the related disclosures, whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk
assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the preparation of the remuneration report and the related
disclosures in order to plan and perform audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose
of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control. An audit also includes evaluating the accounting
policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by the executive directors and supervisory board, as well
as evaluating the overall presentation of the remuneration report and the related disclosures.

We believe that the evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.


Opinion
In our opinion, on the basis of the knowledge obtained in the audit, the remuneration report for the fiscal year from 1. January
2021 to 31. December 2021 and the related disclosures comply, in all material respects, with the financial reporting provisions
of Sec. 162 AktG.


Other matter – formal audit of the remuneration report
The audit of the content of the remuneration report described in this auditor’s report comprises the formal audit of the
remuneration report required by Sec. 162 (3) AktG and the issue of a report on this audit. As we are issuing an unqualified
opinion on the audit of the content of the remuneration report, this also includes the opinion that the disclosures pursuant to
Sec. 162 (1) and (2) AktG are made in the remuneration report in all material respects.




                                                                                                                          402
Deutsche Bank                                 Independent auditor’s report
Annual Report 2021




Limitation of liability
The “General Engagement Terms for Wirtschaftsprüfer and Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaften [German Public Auditors and
Public Audit Firms]” as issued by the IDW on 1 January 2017, which are attached to this report, are applicable to this
engagement and also govern our responsibility and liability to third parties in the context of this engagement.

Eschborn/Frankfurt am Main, March, 7th 2022

Ernst & Young GmbH
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft



Lösken                             Mai
Wirtschaftsprüfer                  Wirtschaftsprüfer
[German Public Auditor]            [German Public Auditor]




                                                                                                                403
Deutsche Bank                                     Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                Regulatory Environment




Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
The content of the 2021 Employee Compensation Report is based on the qualitative and quantitative remuneration disclosure
requirements outlined in Article 450 No. 1 (a) to (j) Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) in conjunction with Section 16 of
the Remuneration Ordinance for Institutions (Institutsvergütungsverordnung – InstVV).

This Compensation Report takes a group-wide view and covers all consolidated entities of the Deutsche Bank Group. In
accordance with regulatory requirements, equivalent reports for 2021 are prepared for the following Significant Institutions
within Deutsche Bank Group: BHW Bausparkasse AG, Germany; Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A., Luxembourg; Deutsche
Bank S.p.A., Italy; Deutsche Bank Mutui S.p.A., Italy; Deutsche Bank S.A.E., Spain.



Regulatory Environment
Ensuring compliance with regulatory requirements is an overarching consideration in our Group Compensation Strategy. We
strive to be at the forefront of implementing regulatory requirements with respect to compensation and will continue to work
closely with our prudential supervisor, the European Central Bank (ECB), to be in compliance with all existing and new
requirements.

As an EU-headquartered institution, Deutsche Bank is subject to the Capital Requirements Regulation / Directive (CRR / CRD)
globally, as transposed into German national law in the German Banking Act and InstVV. We have already comprehensively
adopted the rules in its current version, InstVV 4.0 effective September 25, 2021, for all of Deutsche Bank subsidiaries and
branches world-wide to the extent required in accordance with Section 27 InstVV. As a Significant Institution within the
meaning of InstVV, Deutsche Bank identifies all employees whose work is deemed to have a material impact on the overall
risk profile (Material Risk Takers or MRTs) in accordance with the updated criteria stipulated in the German Baking Act and in
the Commission Delegated Regulation 2021/923. MRTs are, as in the past years, identified at a Group level and at the level
of Significant Institutions. Moreover, as per the requirements which came into force in 2021 and in accordance with the German
Banking Act, Deutsche Bank also identifies MRTs for all CRR institutions at a solo level.

Taking into account more specific sectorial legislation and in accordance with InstVV, some of Deutsche Bank’s subsidiaries
(in particular within the DWS Group) fall under the local transpositions of the Alternative Investments Fund Managers Directive
(AIFMD) or the Undertakings for Collective Investments in Transferable Securities Directive (UCITS). We also identify MRTs
in these subsidiaries. Identified employees are subject to the remuneration provisions outlined in the Guidelines on sound
remuneration policies under AIFMD/UCITS published by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).

Deutsche Bank takes into account the regulations targeted at employees who engage directly or indirectly with the bank’s
clients, for instance as per the local transpositions of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive II – MiFID II. Accordingly,
we have implemented specific provisions for employees deemed to be Relevant Persons to ensure that they act in the best
interest of our clients.

Where applicable, Deutsche Bank is also subject to specific rules and regulations implemented by local regulators. Many of
these requirements are aligned with the InstVV. However, where variations are apparent, proactive and open discussions with
regulators have enabled us to follow the local regulations whilst ensuring that any impacted employees or locations remain
within the bank’s overall Group Compensation Framework. This includes, for example, the compensation structures applied
to Covered Employees in the United States under the requirements of the Federal Reserve Board. In any case, we apply the
InstVV requirements as minimum standards globally.




                                                                                                                             404
Deutsche Bank                                                     Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                Compensation Governance




Compensation Governance
Deutsche Bank has a robust governance structure enabling it to operate within the clear parameters of its Compensation
Strategy and Policy. In accordance with the German two-tier board structure, the Supervisory Board governs the compensation
of the Management Board members while the Management Board oversees compensation matters for all other employees in
the Group. Both the Supervisory Board and the Management Board are supported by specific committees and functions, in
particular the Compensation Control Committee (CCC), the Compensation Officer, and the Senior Executive Compensation
Committee (SECC).

In line with their responsibilities, the bank’s control functions are involved in the design and application of the bank’s
remuneration systems, in the identification of MRTs and in determining the total amount of VC. This includes assessing the
impact of employees’ behavior and the business-related risks, performance criteria, granting of remuneration and severances
as well as ex-post risk adjustments.

Reward Governance structure




1
    Does not comprise a complete list of Supervisory Board Committees.


Compensation Control Committee (CCC)
The Supervisory Board has set up the CCC to support in establishing and monitoring the structure of the compensation system
for the Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG. Furthermore, the CCC monitors the appropriateness of the
compensation systems for the employees of Deutsche Bank Group, as established by the Management Board and the SECC.
The CCC reviews whether the total amount of variable compensation is affordable and set in accordance with the risk, capital
and liquidity situation as well as in alignment with the business and risk strategies. Furthermore, the CCC supports the
Supervisory Board in monitoring the MRT identification process.

The CCC consists of the Chairperson of the Supervisory Board and five further Supervisory Board Members, three of which
are employee representatives. The Committee held six meetings in the calendar year 2021. The members of the Risk
Committee attended two meetings as guests. Further details can be found in the Report of the Supervisory Board within the
Annual Report.

Compensation Officer
The Management Board, in cooperation with the CCC, has appointed a Group Compensation Officer to support the
Supervisory Boards of Deutsche Bank AG and of the bank’s Significant Institutions in Germany in performing their
compensation related duties. The Compensation Officer is involved in the conceptual review, development, monitoring and
application of the employees’ compensation systems, the MRT identification and remuneration disclosures on an ongoing
basis. The Compensation Officer performs all relevant monitoring obligations independently, provides an assessment on the
appropriateness of the design and practices of the compensation systems for employees at least annually and regularly
supports and advises the CCC.




                                                                                                                      405
Deutsche Bank                                   Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                              Compensation Strategy




Senior Executive Compensation Committee (SECC)
The SECC is a delegated committee established by the Management Board which has the mandate to develop sustainable
compensation principles, to prepare recommendations on Total Compensation levels and to ensure appropriate compensation
governance and oversight. The SECC establishes the Compensation and Benefits Strategy and Policy. Moreover, using
quantitative and qualitative factors, the SECC assesses Group and divisional performance as a basis for compensation
decisions and makes recommendations to the Management Board regarding the total amount of annual variable compensation
and its allocation across business divisions and infrastructure functions.

In order to maintain its independence, only representatives from infrastructure and control functions who are not aligned to
any of the business divisions are members of the SECC. In 2021, the SECC’s membership comprised of the Global Head of
Human Resources and the Chief Financial Officer as Co-Chairpersons, as well as the Chief Risk Officer (the latter two are
Management Board Members), the Global Head of Compliance, the Global Head of Performance & Reward as well as an
additional representative from both Finance and Risk as voting members. The Compensation Officer, the Deputy
Compensation Officer and an additional representative from Finance participated as non-voting members. The SECC
generally meets on a monthly basis but with more frequent meetings during the compensation process. It held 16 meetings in
total with regard to the compensation process for the performance year 2021.



Compensation Strategy
Deutsche Bank recognizes that its compensation framework plays a vital role in supporting its strategic objectives. It enables
us to attract and retain the individuals required to achieve our bank’s objectives. The Compensation and Benefits Strategy is
aligned to Deutsche Bank’s business strategy, risk strategy, and to its corporate values and beliefs as outlined below.




                                                                                                                        406
Deutsche Bank                                                         Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                    Group Compensation Framework




Group Compensation Framework
Our compensation framework, generally applicable globally across all regions and business lines, emphasizes an appropriate
balance between Fixed Pay (FP) and Variable Compensation (VC) – together forming Total Compensation (TC). It aligns
incentives for sustainable performance at all levels of Deutsche Bank whilst ensuring the transparency of compensation
decisions and their impact on shareholders and employees. The underlying principles of our compensation framework are
applied to all employees equally, irrespective of differences in seniority, tenure, gender or ethnicity.

Pursuant to CRD and the requirements subsequently adopted in the German Banking Act, Deutsche Bank is subject to a ratio
of 1:1 with regard to fixed-to-variable remuneration components, which was increased to 1:2 with shareholder approval on
May 22, 2014 with an approval rate of 95.27 %, based on valid votes by 27.68 % of the share capital represented at the Annual
General Meeting. Nonetheless, the bank has determined that employees in specific infrastructure functions should continue
to be subject to a ratio of at least 1:1 while Control Functions as defined by InstVV are subject to a ratio of 2:1.

The bank has assigned a Reference Total Compensation (RTC) to eligible employees that describes a reference value for
their role. This value provides our employees orientation on their FP and VC. Actual individual TC can be at, above or below
the Reference Total Compensation, depending on VC decisions.

Fixed Pay is used to compensate employees for their skills, experience and competencies, commensurate with the
requirements, size and scope of their role. The appropriate level of FP is determined with reference to the prevailing market
rates for each role, internal comparisons and applicable regulatory requirements. FP plays a key role in permitting us to meet
our strategic objectives by attracting and retaining the right talent. For the majority of our employees, FP is the primary
compensation component.

Variable Compensation reflects affordability and performance at Group, divisional, and individual level. It allows us to
differentiate individual performance and to drive behavior through appropriate incentives that can positively influence culture.
It also allows for flexibility in the cost base. VC generally consists of two elements – the Group VC Component and the
Individual VC Component.

The Group VC Component is based on one of the overarching goals of the compensation framework – to ensure an explicit
link between VC and the performance of the Group. To assess our annual achievements in reaching our strategic targets, the
four Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) utilized as the basis for determining the 2021 Group VC Component were: Common
Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) Capital Ratio, Leverage Ratio, Adjusted Costs, and Post-Tax Return on Tangible Equity (RoTE). These
four KPIs represent the bank’s capital, leverage, profitability, and cost targets.

The Individual VC Component is delivered either in the form of Individual VC, generally applicable for employees at the level
of Vice President (VP) and above, or as Recognition Award, generally applicable for employees at the level of Assistant Vice
President (AVP) and below. In case of negative performance contributions or misconduct, an employee’s VC can be reduced
accordingly and can go down to zero. VC is granted and paid out subject to Group affordability. Under our compensation
framework, there continues to be no guarantee of VC in an existing employment relationship. Such arrangements are utilized
only on a very limited basis for new hires in the first year of employment and are subject to the bank’s standard deferral
requirements.

Key components of the compensation framework




1
    Some Assistant Vice Presidents and below in select entities and divisions are eligible for Individual VC in lieu of the Recognition Award.




                                                                                                                                                 407
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                               Employee Groups with specific Compensation Structures




Individual VC takes into consideration a number of financial and non-financial factors, including the applicable divisional
performance, the employee’s individual performance, conduct, and adherence to values and beliefs, as well as additional
factors such as the bank’s strategic decisions and retention considerations.

Recognition Awards provide the opportunity to acknowledge and reward outstanding contributions made by the employees of
lower seniority levels in a timely and transparent manner. Generally, the overall size of the Recognition Award budget is
directly linked to a set percentage of FP for the eligible population and it is currently paid out twice a year, based on a review
of nominations and contributions in a process managed at the divisional level.

In the context of InstVV, severance payments are considered variable compensation. The bank’s severance framework
ensures full alignment with the respective InstVV requirements.

Employee benefits complement Total Compensation and are considered FP from a regulatory perspective, as they have no
direct link to performance or discretion. They are granted in accordance with applicable local market practices and
requirements. Pension expenses represent the main element of the bank’s benefits portfolio globally.



Employee Groups with specific Compensation Structures
For some areas of our bank, compensation structures apply that deviate, within regulatory boundaries, in some aspects from
the Group Compensation Framework outlined above.

Postbank units
While generally executive staff of former Postbank follow the remuneration structure of Deutsche Bank, the compensation for
any other staff in Postbank units is based on specific frameworks agreed with trade unions or with the respective workers’
councils. Where no collective agreements exist, compensation is subject to individual contracts. In general, non-executive and
tariff staff in Postbank units receive VC, but the structure and portion of VC can differ between legal entities.

DWS
The vast majority of DWS asset management entities and employees fall under AIFMD or UCITS, while a limited number of
employees remain in scope of bank’s Group Compensation Framework and InstVV. DWS has established its own
compensation governance, policy, and structures, as well as Risk Taker identification process in line with AIFMD/UCITS
requirements. These structures and processes are aligned with InstVV where required, but tailored towards the Asset
Management business. Pursuant to the ESMA Guidelines, DWS’s compensation strategy is designed to ensure an appropriate
ratio between fixed and variable compensation.

Generally, DWS applies remuneration rules that are equivalent to the Deutsche Bank Group approach, but use DWS Group-
related parameters, where possible. Notable deviations from the Group Compensation Framework include the use of share-
based instruments linked to DWS shares and fund-linked instruments. These serve to improve the alignment of employee
compensation with DWS’ shareholders’ and investors’ interests.

Control Functions
In line with InstVV, the bank has defined control functions that are subject to specific regulatory requirements. These control
functions comprise Risk, Compliance, Anti-Financial Crime, Group Audit, parts of Human Resources, and the Compensation
Officer and his Deputy. To prevent conflicts of interest, the parameters used to determine the Individual VC Component of
these control functions do not follow the same parameters being used for the business they oversee. Based on their risk
profile, these functions are subject to a fixed-to-variable pay ratio of 2:1.

In addition, for some corporate functions that perform internal control roles (including Legal, Group Finance, Group Tax,
Regulation, and other parts of Human Resources), the bank has determined a fixed-to-variable pay ratio of 1:1.

Tariff staff
Within Deutsche Bank Group there are 15,667 tariff employees in Germany (based on full-time equivalent). Tariff staff are
either subject to a collective agreement (Tarifvertrag für das private Bankgewerbe und die öffentlichen Banken), as negotiated
between trade unions and employer associations, or subject to agreements as negotiated with the respective trade unions
directly. The remuneration of tariff staff is included in the quantitative disclosures in this report.




                                                                                                                            408
Deutsche Bank                                     Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                Determination of performance-based Variable Compensation




Determination of performance-based Variable Compensation
In 2021, we continued to put a strong focus on our governance related to compensation decision-making processes. A robust
set of rule-based principles for compensation decisions with close links to the performance of both business and individual
were applied.

The total amount of VC for any given performance year is initially determined at Group level, taking into account the bank’s
profitability, solvency, and liquidity position and then allocated to divisions and infrastructure functions based on their
performance in support of achieving the bank’s strategic objectives.

In a first step, Deutsche Bank assesses the bank’s profitability, solvency and liquidity position in line with its Risk Appetite
Framework, including a holistic review against the bank’s multi-year strategic plan to determine what the bank “can” award in
line with regulatory requirements (i.e. Group affordability). In the next step, the bank assesses divisional risk-adjusted
performance, i.e. what the bank “should” award in order to provide an appropriate compensation for contributions to the bank’s
success.

When assessing divisional performance, a range of considerations are referenced. Performance is assessed in the context of
financial and – based on Balanced Scorecards – non-financial targets. The financial targets for front-office divisions are subject
to appropriate risk-adjustment, in particular by referencing the degree of future potential risks to which Deutsche Bank may
be exposed, and the amount of capital required to absorb severe unexpected losses arising from these risks. For the
infrastructure functions, the financial performance assessment is mainly based on the achievement of cost targets. While the
allocation of VC to infrastructure functions, and in particular to control functions, depends on the overall performance of
Deutsche Bank, it is not dependent on the performance of the division(s) that these functions oversee.

At the level of the individual employee, we have established Variable Compensation Guiding Principles, which detail the facto rs
and metrics that have to be taken into account when making Individual VC decisions. Our managers must fully appreciate the
risk-taking activities of individuals to ensure that VC allocations are balanced and risk-taking is not inappropriately incentivized.
The factors and metrics to be considered include, but are not limited to, (i) business delivery (“What”), i.e. quantitative and
qualitative financial, risk-adjusted and non-financial performance metrics, and (ii) behavior (“How”), i.e. culture, conduct and
control considerations such as qualitative inputs from control functions or disciplinary sanctions. Generally, performance is
assessed based on a one year period. However, for Management Board members of Significant Institutions, the performance
across three years is taken into account.




                                                                                                                               409
Deutsche Bank                                                      Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                 Variable Compensation Structure




Variable Compensation Structure
Our compensation structures are designed to provide a mechanism that promotes and supports long-term performance of our
employees and our bank. Whilst a portion of VC is paid upfront, these structures require that an appropriate portion is deferred
to ensure alignment to the sustainable performance of the Group. For both parts of VC, we use Deutsche Bank shares as
instruments and as an effective way to align compensation with Deutsche Bank’s sustainable performance and the interests
of shareholders.

We continue to go beyond regulatory requirements with the scope as well as the amount of VC that is deferred and our
minimum deferral periods for certain employee groups. The deferral rate and period are determined based on the risk
categorization of the employee, the division and the business unit. Where applicable, we start to defer parts of variable
compensation for MRTs where VC is set at or above € 50,000 or where VC exceeds 1/3 of TC. For non-MRTs, deferrals start
at higher levels of VC. MRTs are on average subject to deferral rates in excess of the minimum 40 % (60 % for Senior
Management) as required by InstVV. For MRTs in Material Business Units (MBU) we apply a deferral rate of at least 50 %.
The VC threshold for MRTs requiring at least 60 % deferral is set at € 500,000.

Furthermore, Directors and Managing Directors in Corporate Bank (CB), Investment Bank (IB) or Capital Release Unit (CRU)
are subject to a VC deferral rate of 100 % with respect to any VC in excess of € 500,000. Moreover, if Fixed Pay for these
employees exceeds an amount of € 500,000, the full VC is deferred.

As detailed in the table below, deferral periods range from three to five years, dependent on employee groups. For MRTs the
minimum deferral period was increased from three years to four years in compliance with InstVV 4.0 requirement, applicable
as of 2021.

Overview on 2021 Award Types (excluding DWS Group)
Award Type                 Description                            Beneficiaries              Deferral Period             Retention Period         Proportion


Upfront:                   Upfront cash portion                   All eligible               N/A                         N/A                      MRTs with
Cash VC                                                           employees                                                                       VC ≥ € 50,000 or where
                                                                                                                                                  VC exceeds 1/3 of TC:
                                                                                                                                                  50 % of upfront VC

                                                                                                                                                  Non-MRTs with 2021 TC
                                                                                                                                                  ≤ € 500,000: 100 % of
                                                                                                                                                  upfront VC
Upfront:                   Upfront equity portion (linked to All MRTs with VC ≥              N/A                         Twelve months            50 % of upfront VC
Equity Upfront Award       Deutsche Bank’s share price       € 50,000 or where
(EUA)                      over the retention period)        VC exceeds 1/3 of
                                                             TC

                                                                  All employees with
                                                                  2021 TC > €
                                                                  500,000

Deferred:                  Deferred cash portion                  All employees with         Equal tranche vesting: N/A                           50 % of deferred VC
Restricted Incentive                                              deferred VC                MRTs: 4 years
Award (RIA)                                                                                  Sen. Mgmt.1: 5 years
                                                                                             Other: 3 years
Deferred:                  Deferred equity portion (linked All employees with                Equal tranche vesting: Twelve months for             50 % of deferred VC
Restricted Equity          to Deutsche Bank’s share price deferred VC                        MRTs: 4 years          MRTs
Award (REA)                over the vesting and retention                                    Sen. Mgmt.1: 5 years
                           period)                                                           Other: 3 years

N/A – Not applicable
1
  For the purpose of Performance Year 2021 annual awards, Senior Management is defined as DB AG MB-1 positions; voting members of Business Division Top Executive
  Committees; MB members of Significant Institutions; respective MB-1 positions with managerial responsibility. For the specific deferral rules for the Management Board of
  DB AG refer to the Compensation Report for the Management Board.


Our employees are not allowed to sell, pledge, transfer or assign a deferred award or any rights in respect to the award. They
may not enter into any transaction having an economic effect of hedging any variable compensation, for example offsetting
the risk of price movement with respect to the equity-based award. Our Human Resources and Compliance functions,
overseen by the Compensation Officer, work together to monitor employee trading activity and to ensure that all our employees
comply with this requirement.




                                                                                                                                                                       410
Deutsche Bank                                                         Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                    Ex-post Risk Adjustment of Variable Compensation




Ex-post Risk Adjustment of Variable Compensation
In line with regulatory requirements relating to ex-post risk adjustment of variable compensation, we believe that a long-term
view on conduct and performance of our employees is a key element of deferred VC. As a result, all deferred awards are
subject to performance conditions and forfeiture provisions as detailed below.

Overview on Deutsche Bank Group performance conditions and forfeiture provisions of Variable Compensation granted for
Performance Year 2021




1
    Considering clearly defined and governed adjustments for relevant Profit and Loss items (e.g., business restructurings; impairments of goodwill or intangibles).
2
    Other provisions may apply as outlined in the respective plan rules.




                                                                                                                                                                       411
Deutsche Bank                                                       Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                  Compensation Decisions for 2021




Compensation Decisions for 2021
Year-end considerations and decisions for 2021
All compensation decisions are made within the boundaries of regulatory requirements. These requirements form the
overarching and limiting principle of determining compensation in Deutsche Bank. In particular, management must ensure that
compensation decisions are not detrimental to maintaining a sound capital base and liquidity resources of the bank.

Due to the continued focus on our strategy and the dedication of our employees, 2021 was a very successful year for Deutsche
Bank: All our businesses performed well – especially when taking into account the continuing COVID-19 pandemic and the
bank’s ongoing transformation – and almost all of the anticipated transformation costs have now been recognized. As a result,
we are considerably more profitable with a pre-tax profit of € 3.4 billion and a net profit of € 2.5 billion. We have also made
further progress and remain fully disciplined on costs. This allows us to build firm foundations for sustainable profitability, and
sets the path to the final stage of our announced transformation.

Although 2021 was a very positive year for Deutsche Bank, we once more applied a prudent and forward-looking approach
when deciding on the 2021 variable compensation and deferral structures, without losing sight of the need to remunerate our
employees fairly. These decisions are taken according to performance and in line with market conditions, and of course within
the boundaries of affordability. Again, when determining the amount of year-end performance-based VC, we have exercised
more moderation than the results at the Group and divisional level would have required. As in previous years, the SECC has
been constantly monitoring and reviewing the impact of potential VC awards not only with regard to our capital and liquidity
base but also taking into account our ambitious cost targets.

In the context of the above considerations, the Management Board confirmed that the bank is in a position to award variable
compensation, including a year-end performance-based VC pool of € 2.099 billion for 2021. The VC for the Management
Board of Deutsche Bank AG was determined by our Supervisory Board in a separate process. It is, however, included in the
tables and charts below.

As part of the overall 2021 VC awards granted in March 2022, the Group VC Component was awarded to all eligible employees
in line with the assessment of the four defined KPIs, as outlined in the chapter Group Compensation Framework. The
Management Board determined a payout rate of 77.5 % for the Group VC Component in 2021 (2020: 72.5 %).

The increase of 2021 VC awards compared to 2020 is driven by a combination of factors. Deutsche Bank’s improved
performance plays a part, with the composition of the staff population including the addition of key senior roles essential for
the effective execution of our strategy and certain FX effects also impacting the relative size of the VC awards.

Compensation awards for 2021 – all employees
                                                                                                                                                            2021         2020
                                   Super-        Mana-                                                                         Control    Corporate
in € m.                             visory      gement                                                                          Func-        Func-         Group        Group
(unless stated otherwise)¹         Board²        Board3          IB3          CB3          PB3          AM3         CRU3        tions3        tions3        Total        Total
Number of employees
(full-time equivalent)                 22           11        7,202       13,265       28,100         4,072          267        5,936       24,117       82,969       84,659
Total compensation                      7           79        2,215        1,280        2,471           762          100          662        2,342        9,912       10,119
   Base salary and
   allowances                            7          27        1,098          929        1,889           422            64         568        1,813         6,811        6,940
   Pension expenses                      0           8           63           80          154            39             5          49          139           537          554
Fixed Pay according to
§ 2 InstVV                               7          35        1,161        1,009        2,044           461            69         617        1,952         7,348        7,494
   Year-end
   performance-based
   VC4                                   0          40        1,018          188           249          230            23           37          315        2,099        1,857
   Other VC4                             0           1            5            7            45           57             0            2           19          135          286
   Severance payments                    0           3           31           77           133           15             8            7           57          330          482
Variable Pay according
to § 2 InstVV                            0          44        1,054          271           427          301            31           46          390        2,564        2,625
1
    The table may contain marginal rounding differences. FTE (full-time equivalent) as of December 31, 2021.
2
    Supervisory Board includes the Deutsche Bank AG Supervisory Board Members. They are not considered for the Group Total number of employees. Employee
    representatives are considered with their compensation for the Supervisory Board role only (their employee compensation is included in the relevant divisional column). The
    remuneration for members of the Deutsche Bank AG Supervisory Board is not reflected in the Group Total.
3
    Management Board includes the Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG. IB = Investment Bank; CB = Corporate Bank; PB = Private Bank; AM = Asset
    Management; CRU = Capital Release Unit. Control Functions include Chief Risk Office, Group Audit, Compliance and Anti-Financial Crime. Corporate Functions include any
    Infrastructure function which is neither captured as a Control Function nor part of any division.
4
    Year-end performance-based VC includes Individual and Group VC. Other VC includes other contractual VC commitments such as sign-on awards, retention awards,
    recognition awards, DWS Performance Share Unit-Award (PSU-Award) and specific VC elements for tariff staff and civil servants. It also includes fringe benefits awarded to
    Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG which are to be classified as variable remuneration. The table does not include new hire replacement awards for lost
    entitlements from previous employers (buyouts).




                                                                                                                                                                         412
Deutsche Bank                                    Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                               Material Risk Taker Compensation Disclosure




Reported year-end performance-based Variable Compensation and deferral rates year over year – all employees

           Deferral rate in %
€4 bn                                                                                                        100%
          47%        49%     52%       49%       28%         42%         37%         36%       47%    48%
                                                                                                             90%
          3,2        3,2
                                                                                                             80%
€3 bn
                              2,7
                                                                                                             70%
                                        2,4
           1,7       1,6                                      2,2
                                                                                                      2,1    60%
                              1,3                                         1,9                  1,9
€2 bn                                                                                                        50%
                                        1,2                                           1,6
                                                              1,3                                     1,1    40%
                                                                                               1,0
                                                                          1,2
                                                                                      1,0
                                                                                                             30%
€1 bn
           1,5       1,6
                              1,4                 0,5                                                        20%
                                        1,2
                                                              0,9                              0,9    1,0
                                                  0,4                     0,7         0,6
                                                                                                             10%
€0 bn                                             0,1                                                        0%
          2012       2013    2014      2015      2016        2017        2018        2019      2020   2021

                                       Deferred Compensation          Upfront Cash
         Due to rounding, numbers presented may not add up precisely to the totals.

Deutsche Bank continues to apply deferral structures that go beyond the regulatory minimum, resulting in an overall deferral
rate (all employees including non-MRT population) of 48 % in 2021. For the MRT population only, the deferral rate amounts
to 92 %.



Material Risk Taker Compensation Disclosure
On a global basis, 1,263 employees were identified as MRTs according to InstVV for financial year 2021, compared to 2,298
employees for 2020. This decrease is attributable to the reduced number of quantitative (remuneration driven) MRTs as a
result of the newly applicable remuneration thresholds following regulatory changes in 2021. The number of 2021 Group MRTs
amounts to 1,005 individuals. Moreover, 181 individuals were identified by Significant Institutions and 129 individua ls were
identified by Other CRR Institutions. The remuneration elements for all Group MRTs (contrary to 2020 where both Group
MRTs and MRTs identified by Significant Institutions, which are also reported by the respective entities, were included) are
detailed in the tables below in accordance with Section 16 InstVV and Article 450 CRR.




                                                                                                                       413
Deutsche Bank                                                     Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                Material Risk Taker Compensation Disclosure




Remuneration for 2021 - Material Risk Takers (REM 1)
                                                                                                                                                                  2021
                                                                                           Super-         Manage-
                     in € m.                                                                visory           ment           Senior      Other Material           Group
                     (unless stated otherwise)¹                                            Board²          Board3      Management4        Risk Takers             Total
                     Number of MRTs5                                                           22               11              118              807              958
                     Total Fixed Pay                                                            7               35              134              529              704
                       of which: cash-based                                                     5               27              128              503              664
                       of which: shares or equivalent ownership interests                       2                0                0                0                2
Fixed Pay
                       of which: share-linked instruments or equivalent
                       non-cash instruments                                                        0             0                0                0                0
                       of which: other instruments                                                 0             0                0                0                0
                       of which: other forms                                                       0             8                6               26               39
                     Number of MRTs5                                                               0            11              114              803              928
                     Total Variable Pay6                                                           0            44              130              526              699
                       of which: cash-based                                                        0            23               62              266              351
                          of which: deferred                                                       0            21               50              221              292
                       of which: shares or equivalent ownership interests                          0            21               56              254              330
                          of which: deferred                                                       0            21               47              219              287
Variable Pay           of which: share-linked instruments or equivalent
                       non-cash instruments                                                        0             0               11                7               18
                          of which: deferred                                                       0             0                9                5               14
                       of which: other instruments                                                 0             0                1                0                1
                          of which: deferred                                                       0             0                1                0                1
                       of which: other forms                                                       0             0                0                0                0
                          of which: deferred                                                       0             0                0                0                0
                     Total Pay                                                                     7            79              263            1,055            1,404
1
    The table may contain marginal rounding differences.
2
    Supervisory Board includes the Deutsche Bank AG Supervisory Board Members.
3
    Management Board includes the Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG.
4
    Senior Management is defined as DB AG MB-1 positions and voting members of Business Division Top Executive Committees.
5
    Beneficiaries only (HC reported for Supervisory Board and Management Board, FTE reported for the remaining part). Therefore the totals do not add up to the 1,005
    individuals identified as Group MRTs.
6
    Variable Pay includes Deutsche Bank´s Year-end performance-based VC for 2021, Other VC and severance payments. It also includes fringe benefits awarded to
    Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG which are to be classified as variable remuneration. The table does not include new hire replacement awards for lost
    entitlements from previous employers (buyouts).


Guaranteed variable remuneration and severance payments - Material Risk Takers (REM 2)
                                                                                                                                                                 2021
                                                                                         Super-         Manage-
in € m.                                                                                   visory           ment           Senior       Other Material           Group
(unless stated otherwise)¹                                                               Board²          Board3      Management4         Risk Takers             Total
Guaranteed variable remuneration awards
Number of MRTs5                                                                               0                 0                1                 3                    4
Total amount                                                                                  0                 0                0                 3                    3
   of which: paid during financial year, not taken into account in bonus
   cap                                                                                        0                 0                0                 0                    0
Severance payments awarded in previous periods, paid out during
financial year
Number of MRTs5                                                                               0                 0                0                 0                    0
Total amount                                                                                  0                 0                0                 0                    0
Severance payments awarded during financial year
Number of MRTs5                                                                               0                 1                6                28               35
Total amount6                                                                                 0                 3                4                 8               16
   of which: paid during financial year                                                       0                 2                3                 8               13
   of which: deferred                                                                         0                 2                2                 0                3
   of which: paid during financial year, not taken into account in bonus
   cap                                                                                        0                 3                4                 8               16
1
    The table may contain marginal rounding differences.
2
    Supervisory Board includes the Deutsche Bank AG Supervisory Board Members.
3
    Management Board includes the Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG.
4
    Senior Management is defined as DB AG MB-1 positions and voting members of Business Division Top Executive Committees.
5
    Beneficiaries only (HC reported for all categories).
6
    Severance payments are generally not taken into account for the bonus cap. The highest single severance payment made in 2021 amounts to € 3,462,111.




                                                                                                                                                                  414
Deutsche Bank                                                         Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                    Material Risk Taker Compensation Disclosure




Deferred remuneration - Material Risk Takers (REM 3)
                                                                                                                                                                                 2021
                                                                                                                   Amount of                                                   Total of
                                                                                                                performance                                                 amount of
                                                                                                 Amount of        adjustment                                                 deferred
                                                                                              performance        made in the                          Total amount      remuneration
                                                                                                adjustment     financial year                           of deferred       awarded for
                                       Total amount                                            made in the        to deferred     Total amount       remuneration            previous
                                          of deferred                                        financial year    remuneration       of adjustment            awarded       performance
                                       remuneration                                             to deferred     that was due          during the         before the    period that has
                                         awarded for                             Of which    remuneration           to vest in    financial year     financial year      vested but is
                                             previous    Of which due           vesting in    that was due              future   due to ex post       actually paid         subject to
in € m.                                 performance       to vest in the      subsequent      to vest in the    performance              implicit         out in the         retention
(unless stated otherwise)¹                    periods    financial year    financial years   financial year              years     adjustments5     financial year6            periods
Supervisory Board2                                 0                  0                 0                 0                 0                  0                  0                  0
  Cash-based                                       0                  0                 0                 0                 0                  0                  0                  0
  Shares or equivalent
  ownership interests                              0                  0                 0                 0                 0                  0                  0                  0
  Share-linked instruments or
  equivalent non-cash
  instruments                                      0                  0                0                  0                 0                  0                  0                  0
  Other instruments                                0                  0                0                  0                 0                  0                  0                  0
  Other forms                                      0                  0                0                  0                 0                  0                  0                  0
Management Board3                                 62                  5               57                  0                 0                  6                  5                  1
  Cash-based                                      25                  4               22                  0                 0                  0                  4                  0
  Shares or equivalent
  ownership interests                             37                  1               36                  0                 0                  6                  1                  1
  Share-linked instruments or
  equivalent non-cash
  instruments                                     0                  0                 0                  0                 0                 0                  0                  0
  Other instruments                               0                  0                 0                  0                 0                 0                  0                  0
  Other forms                                     0                  0                 0                  0                 0                 0                  0                  0
Senior management4                              336                 58               278                  0                 0                30                 58                 15
  Cash-based                                    172                 38               134                  0                 0                 0                 38                  0
  Shares or equivalent
  ownership interests                           150                 19               131                  0                 0                29                 19                 15
  Share-linked instruments or
  equivalent non-cash
  instruments                                    12                  1                11                  0                 0                 0                 1                   1
  Other instruments                               1                  0                 1                  0                 0                 0                 0                   0
  Other forms                                     0                  0                 0                  0                 0                 0                 0                   0
Other Material Risk Takers                    1,319                292             1,027                  1                 2               111               289                  67
  Cash-based                                    712                175               537                  0                 1                 0               173                   0
  Shares or equivalent
  ownership interests                           599                117               482                  0                 1               110               115                  67
  Share-linked instruments or
  equivalent non-cash
  instruments                                     7                  1                 6                  0                 0                 0                 1                   1
  Other instruments                               1                  0                 0                  0                 0                 0                 0                   0
  Other forms                                     0                  0                 0                  0                 0                 0                 0                   0
Total amount                                  1,717                355             1,362                  1                 2               147               352                  84
1
    The table may contain marginal rounding differences.
2
    Supervisory Board includes the Deutsche Bank AG Supervisory Board Members.
3
    Management Board includes the Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG.
4
    Senior Management is defined as DB AG MB-1 positions and voting members of Business Division Top Executive Committees.
5
    Changes of value of deferred remuneration due to the changes of prices of instruments.
6
    Defined as remuneration awarded before the financial year which vested in the financial year (including where subject to a retention period).




                                                                                                                                                                                415
Deutsche Bank                                                      Compensation of the employees (unaudited)
Annual Report 2021                                                 Material Risk Taker Compensation Disclosure




Remuneration of high earners – Material Risk Takers (REM 4)
                                                                                                                                                                    2021
in €                                                                                                                                               Number of individuals1
Total Pay2
  1,000,000 to 1,499,999                                                                                                                                            234
  1,500,000 to 1,999,999                                                                                                                                            115
  2,000,000 to 2,499,999                                                                                                                                             56
  2,500,000 to 2,999,999                                                                                                                                             33
  3,000,000 to 3,499,999                                                                                                                                             19
  3,500,000 to 3,999,999                                                                                                                                             19
  4.000,000 to 4,499,999                                                                                                                                              9
  4,500,000 to 4,999,999                                                                                                                                              4
  5,000,000 to 5,999,999                                                                                                                                             10
  6,000,000 to 6,999,999                                                                                                                                              6
  7,000,000 to 7,999,999                                                                                                                                              8
  8,000,000 to 8,999,999                                                                                                                                              3
  9,000,000 to 9,999,999                                                                                                                                              3
  10,000,000 to 10,999,999                                                                                                                                            1
Total                                                                                                                                                               520
1
    Comprises MRTs only (including 2021 leavers).
2
    Includes all components of FP and VC (including severances). Buyouts are not included.


In total, 520 MRTs received a Total Pay of € 1 million or more for 2021 (in comparison to 614 MRTs in 2020). This decrease
is mainly attributable to a reduced number of retention and severance payments awarded.

Compensation Awards 2021 – Material Risk Takers (REM 5)



                                      Management Body Remuneration                                                                             Business Areas
                                                                 Total                                                                            Independent
                                     Super-       Manage-      Manage                                                                                  internal
in € m.                               visory         ment        ment                                                                Corporate          control
(unless stated otherwise)¹           Board2        Board2        Body           IB2      CB2         PB2       AM2        CRU2       functions2      functions2     Total
Total number of Material
Risk Takers3                                                                                                                                                         958
  of which: Management
  Body                                    22           11           33          N/A      N/A         N/A       N/A          N/A          N/A          N/A            N/A
  of which: Senior
  Management4                            N/A          N/A          N/A           20          18         7        5             5          55             8           118
  of which: Other Material
  Risk Takers                            N/A          N/A          N/A          465          73        76       15            20         117            41           807
Total Pay of Material Risk
Takers                                     7           79           86          861          87        98       41            25         169            36         1,404
  of which: variable pay5                  -           44           44          462          41        44       27             9          64             9           699
  of which: fixed pay                      7           35           42          399          46        54       15            16         105            27           704
1
    The table may contain marginal rounding differences.
2
    Supervisory Board includes the Deutsche Bank AG Supervisory Board Members, Management Board includes the Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG. IB =
    Investment Bank; CB = Corporate Bank; PB = Private Bank; AM = Asset Management; CRU = Capital Release Unit. Control Functions include Chief Risk Office, Group Audit,
    Compliance and Anti-Financial Crime. Corporate Functions include any Infrastructure function which is neither captured as a Control Function nor part of any division.
3
    HC reported for Supervisory Board and Management Board, FTE reported for the remaining part. Therefore the totals do not add up to the 1.005 individuals identified as
    Group MRTs.
4
    Senior Management is defined as DB AG MB-1 positions and voting members of Business Division Top Executive Committees.
5
    Variable Pay includes Deutsche Bank´s Year-end performance-based VC for 2021, Other VC and severance payments. It also includes fringe benefits awarded to
    Management Board Members of Deutsche Bank AG which are to be classified as variable remuneration. The table does not include new hire replacement awards for lost
    entitlements from previous employers (buyouts).




                                                                                                                                                                   416
4
Corporate Governance Statement
­according to Sections 289f and 315d
 of the German Commercial Code/
 Corporate Governance Report




418   Management Board and Supervisory Board
430   Reporting and Transparency
430   Related party transactions
431   Auditing and Controlling
434	Compliance with the German Corporate
     Governance Code
Deutsche Bank                                   Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                              Management Board




All information presented in this Corporate Governance Statement according to Section 289f and 315d of the German
Commercial Code is as of February 11, 2022.


Management Board and Supervisory Board

Management Board
The Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG is responsible for the management of the company in accordance with the law,
the Articles of Association of Deutsche Bank AG and the Terms of Reference for the Management Board with the objective of
creating sustainable value in the interests of the company. It considers the interests of shareholders, employees and other
company-related stakeholders. The members of the Management Board are collectively responsible for managing the bank’s
business. The Management Board, as the Group Management Board, manages Deutsche Bank Group in accordance with
uniform guidelines; it exercises general control over all Group companies.

The Management Board decides on all matters prescribed by law and the Articles of Association and ensures compliance with
the legal requirements and internal guidelines (compliance). It also takes the necessary measures to ensure that adequate
internal guidelines are developed and implemented. The Management Board's responsibilities include, in particular, the bank’s
strategic management and direction, the allocation of resources, financial accounting and reporting, control and risk
management, as well as a properly functioning business organization and corporate control. The Management Board decides
on the appointments to the senior management level below the Management Board and, in particular, on the appointment of
Global Key Function Holders. In appointing people to management functions in the Group, the Management Board takes
diversity into account and strives, in particular, to achieve an appropriate representation of women (more detailed information
in section “Targets for the proportion of women in management positions/gender quota“ in this Corporate Governance
Statement).

The Management Board works closely together with the Supervisory Board in a cooperative relationship of trust and for the
benefit of the company. The Management Board reports to the Supervisory Board at a minimum within the scope prescribed
by law or administrative guidelines, in particular on all issues with relevance for the Group concerning strategy, the intended
business policy, planning, business development, risk situation, risk management, staff development, reputation and
compliance.

A comprehensive presentation of the duties, responsibilities and procedures of our Management Board is specified in its
Terms of Reference, the current version of which is available on our website (www.db.com/ir/en/documents.htm).

Personnel changes to the Management Board and the current members of the Management
Board

The following members of the Management Board were appointed for a three-year period:

– Rebecca Short with effect from May 1, 2021
– Olivier Vigneron with effect from May 20, 2022.

The following member left the Management Board:

– Frank Kuhnke as of April 30, 2021.

Furthermore, in March 2021, Stuart Lewis informed the Supervisory Board of his decision to retire after the Annual General
Meeting in May 2022.

The following information is provided on the current members of the Management Board on the year in which they were born,
year in which they were first appointed and year in which their term expires as well as their current positions and area of
responsibility according to the current Business Allocation Plan for the Management Board. Also specified are their other
board mandates or directorships outside of Deutsche Bank Group as well as all memberships in legally prescribed supervisory
boards or other comparable domestic or foreign supervisory bodies of commercial enterprises. The members of our
Management Board have generally undertaken not to assume chairmanships of supervisory boards of companies outside
Deutsche Bank Group.




                                                                                                                         418
Deutsche Bank                                  Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                             Management Board




Christian Sewing
Year of birth: 1970
First appointed: 2015
Term expires: 2026

Christian Sewing became a member of our Management Board on January 1, 2015, and is our Chief Executive Officer with
effect from April 8, 2018. He is responsible on the Management Board for Communications & Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR), Research and Group Audit. He was responsible for the Corporate Bank and the Investment Bank until April 2021.
Since May 2021 Mr. Sewing has been responsible for Human Resources.

Prior to assuming his role on the Management Board, Mr. Sewing was Global Head of Group Audit and held a number of
positions before that in Risk, including Deputy Chief Risk Officer (from 2012 to 2013) and Chief Credit Officer (from 2010 to
2012) of Deutsche Bank.

From 2005 until 2007, Mr. Sewing was a member of the Management Board of Deutsche Genossenschafts-Hypothekenbank.

Before graduating with a diploma from the Bankakademie Bielefeld and Hamburg, Mr. Sewing completed a bank
apprenticeship at Deutsche Bank in 1989.

Mr. Sewing does not have any external directorships subject to disclosure.

Karl von Rohr
Year of birth: 1965
First appointed: 2015
Term expires: 2023

Karl von Rohr became a member of our Management Board on November 1, 2015, and President as of April 8, 2018. He is
responsible on the Management Board for the Private Bank and Asset Management. He is also Regional Chief Executive
Officer (CEO) for Germany, as well as for the EMEA Region (Europe, Middle East and Africa).

Mr. von Rohr joined Deutsche Bank in 1997. From November 2015 to November 2019 he was the Management Board member
responsible for Human Resources and until July 2020, he was responsible for Legal, Group Governance and Government &
Regulatory Affairs. From 2013 to 2015 he was Global Chief Operating Officer, Regional Management. Prior to this, he was
Head of Human Resources for Deutsche Bank in Germany and member of the Management Board of Deutsche Bank Privat-
und Geschäftskunden AG. During his time at Deutsche Bank, he has held various senior management positions in other
divisions in Germany and Belgium.

He studied law at the universities of Bonn (Germany), Kiel (Germany), Lausanne (Switzerland) and at Cornell University
(U.S.A.).

Mr. von Rohr does not have any external directorships subject to disclosure.

He is Chairman of the Supervisory Board of DWS Group GmbH & Co. KGaA.




                                                                                                                       419
Deutsche Bank                                   Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                              Management Board




Fabrizio Campelli
Year of birth: 1973
First appointed: 2019
Term expires: 2022

Fabrizio Campelli became a member of our Management Board on November 1, 2019. He was our Chief Transformation
Officer and the Management Board member responsible for Transformation and Human Resources until April 2021. Since
May 2021, Mr. Campelli is responsible for the Corporate Bank and the Investment Bank and since August 2021 also for UK &
Ireland.

He previously spent four years as the Global Head of Deutsche Bank Wealth Management. Before that, he was Head of
Strategy & Organizational Development as well as Deputy Chief Operating Officer for Deutsche Bank Group.

He joined Deutsche Bank in 2004 after working at McKinsey & Company in the firm’s London and Milan offices, focusing on
strategic assignments mainly for global financial institutions.

He holds an MBA from MIT Sloan School of Management and a Business Administration degree from Bocconi University in
Milan.

Mr. Campelli has been a member of the following Supervisory Boards: BVV Versicherungsverein des Bankgewerbes a.G. and
BVV Versorgungskasse des Bankgewerbes e.V.

Bernd Leukert
Year of birth: 1967
First appointed: 2020
Term expires: 2022

Bernd Leukert became a member of our Management Board on January 1, 2020. He is our Chief Technology, Data and
Innovation Officer and is responsible for the Chief Information Offices for the Infrastructure areas and the business divisions,
Chief Technology Office and the Chief Security Office. He has also been responsible for Data Governance and Oversight and
Trade Settlement since May, 2021, as well as for Cloud and Innovation since August 2021.

He joined Deutsche Bank on September 1, 2019. He previously worked for many years at SAP SE, the global software
company. From 2014 to 2019, he was responsible for product development and innovations as well as the Digital Business
Services division on the Executive Board. He joined SAP in 1994 and held various management positions.

Mr. Leukert studied Industrial Engineering and Management at the University of Karlsruhe and at Trinity College Dublin,
graduating in 1994 with a Master’s Degree in Business Administration.

He is member of the Supervisory Board of Bertelsmann SE & Co. KGaA.

He is a member of the Supervisory Board of DWS Group GmbH & Co. KGaA.

Stuart Lewis
Year of birth: 1965
First appointed: 2012
Term expires: 2023

Stuart Lewis became a member of our Management Board on June 1, 2012. He is our Chief Risk Officer responsible for the
functions managing Credit Risk, Non-Financial Risk, Market Risk and Liquidity Risk as well as for the Risk-Infrastructure units.
He was responsible for Compliance, Anti-Financial Crime (AFC) and the Business Selection and Conflicts Office until April
2021 and for the United Kingdom & Ireland region until July 2021.

He joined Deutsche Bank in 1996. Prior to assuming his current role, Mr. Lewis was Deputy Chief Risk Officer and
subsequently Chief Risk Officer of the Corporate & Investment Bank from 2010 to 2012. Between 2006 and 2010 he was
Chief Credit Officer.

Before joining Deutsche Bank in 1996, he worked at Credit Suisse and Continental Illinois National Bank in London.

He studied at the University of Dundee, where he obtained an LLB (Hons), and he holds an LLM from the London School of
Economics. He also attended the College of Law, Guildford.

Mr. Lewis does not have any external directorships subject to disclosure. He has held the position of Visiting Professor
in Practice in the Finance Department at the London School of Economics since 2017.




                                                                                                                          420
Deutsche Bank                                   Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                              Management Board




James von Moltke
Year of birth: 1969
First appointed: 2017
Term expires: 2023

James von Moltke became a member of our Management Board on July 1, 2017. He is our Chief Financial Officer and in this
function he is responsible for, among other things, Finance, Group Tax, Treasury and Investor Relations.

Before Mr. von Moltke joined Deutsche Bank he served as Treasurer of Citigroup. He started his career at Credit Suisse First
Boston in London in 1992. In 1995, he joined J.P. Morgan, working at the bank for 10 years in New York and Hong Kong.
After next working at Morgan Stanley in New York for four years, where he led the Financial Technology advisory team globally,
Mr. von Moltke joined Citigroup as Head of Corporate M&A in 2009 and three years later became the Global Head of Financial
Planning.

He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from New College, University of Oxford.

Mr. von Moltke does not have any external directorships subject to disclosure.

Alexander von zur Mühlen
Year of birth: 1975
First appointed: 2020
Term expires: 2023

Alexander von zur Mühlen became a member of our Management Board on August 1, 2020. He is our Regional CEO Asia
Pacific.

Mr. von zur Mühlen joined Deutsche Bank in 1998 and over the years has held a range of management roles in London and
Frankfurt across infrastructure and business divisions. From 2018 to 2020 he was responsible for the Group’s strategic
development and was the advisor to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Before that, he served as Co-Head of Global Capital
Markets, with a regional focus on Asia Pacific and EMEA. From 2009 to 2017, he was Group Treasurer.

Alexander von zur Mühlen holds a Diploma in Business Administration from the Berlin School of Economics and Law in Berlin.

Mr. von zur Mühlen does not have any external directorships subject to disclosure.

Christiana Riley
Year of birth: 1978
First appointed: 2020
Term expires: 2022

Christiana Riley became a member of our Management Board on January 1, 2020. She is our Regional CEO Americas.

Mrs. Riley joined Deutsche Bank in 2006 where she was recently the Chief Financial Officer of the Corporate & Investment
Bank. She previously spent nine years in Group Strategy & Planning, which she lead from 2011 to 2015. Prior to this Mrs.
Riley worked at the management consultancy McKinsey & Company and at the investment bank Greenhill & Co.

She graduated cum laude in 2000 from Princeton University in America where she studied Romance Languages, Literature
and Linguistics. She also studied at London Business School in the UK, where she gained a Master of Business Administration
in 2005.

Mrs. Riley is a member of the Supervisory Board of The Clearing House Payments Company LLC.

She is Chief Executive Officer of DB USA Corporation.




                                                                                                                        421
Deutsche Bank                                  Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                             Management Board




Rebecca Short
Year of birth: 1974
First appointed: 2021
Term expires: 2024

Rebecca Short became a member of our Management Board on May 1, 2021. She is our Chief Transformation Officer and
the Management Board member responsible for Transformation, Global Procurement and the Capital Release Unit.

She previously spent almost six years within Finance as Head of Group Planning & Performance Management.

She joined Deutsche Bank on its graduate programme in Auckland in 1998. She moved to London in 2000 with Credit Risk
Management where she spent 12 years, formerly as European Head of Corporates. She then set up a new Risk-wide team,
Strategic Risk Analysis & Reporting, in 2012 before moving to a senior central management role in Audit in 2013 where she
spent two years.

She has a BCom (Honours) degree in Finance & Accounting from the University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Mrs. Short does not have any external directorships subject to disclosure.

Professor Dr. Stefan Simon
Year of birth: 1969
First appointed: 2020
Term expires: 2023

Professor Dr. Stefan Simon became a member of our Management Board on August 1, 2020. He is our Chief Administrative
Officer (CAO) and is responsible for Government and Regulatory Affairs as well as for Legal and Governance. Additionally,
since May 2021 he has been responsible for Compliance, Anti-Financial-Crime (AFC) and the Business Selection and
Conflicts Office, as well as for Controls Testing & Assurance since August 2021.

Professor Dr. Simon joined Deutsche Bank on August 1, 2019. He was a member of Deutsche Bank’s Supervisory Board from
August 2016 until July 2019 and was Chairman of its Integrity Committee. He is a lawyer and tax consultant and between
1997 and 2016 worked at the law firm Flick Gocke Schaumburg, where he became a partner in 2002. Since 2008 he has also
been an Honorary Professor at the University of Cologne.

He studied law at the University of Cologne and received his doctorate there in 1998.

Professor Dr. Simon is Chairman of the Advisory Council of Leop. Krawinkel GmbH & Co. KG.




                                                                                                                    422
Deutsche Bank                                    Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                               Supervisory Board




Supervisory Board
The Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank AG appoints, supervises and advises the Management Board and is directly involved
in decisions of fundamental importance to the bank. It works together closely with the Management Board in a cooperative
relationship of trust and for the benefit of the company. The internal organization of the Supervisory Board and its committees
as well as the tasks and profiles of the individual members are subject to specific statutory and regulatory requirements that
further specify and supplement the corporate-law regulations concerning corporate governance. Such requirements are
founded on, among other things, the German Banking Act (Kreditwesengesetz), the Remuneration Ordinance for Institutions
(Institutsvergütungsverordnung), the guidelines of the European Banking Authority (EBA) and European Securities and
Markets Authority (ESMA) and the administrative practices of the European Central Bank as our supervisory authority. In
individual cases, these diverge from the recommendations of the German Corporate Governance Code (“GCGC”). The
Supervisory Board’s tasks, meeting preparations and follow-ups, as well as general rules for the committees, are set out in
Terms of Reference for the Supervisory Board. The current version is available on the Deutsche Bank website
(www.db.com/ir/en/documents.htm). The number of meetings held during the financial year is specified in the Report of the
Supervisory Board.

Together with the Management Board, the Supervisory Board arranges for a long-term succession planning: The Nomination
Committee supports the Chairman’s Committee and the Supervisory Board in identifying candidates to fill a position on the
bank’s Management Board. In doing so, the Committee prepares a position description with a candidate profile and states the
expected time commitment. Suitable candidates are identified, in some cases in collaboration with external recruiting
consultants, and structured interviews are conducted. Besides this external succession planning, the Management Board and
Supervisory Board maintain a list of internal candidates. The Nomination Committee and the Supervisory Board regularly
receive reports from the Management Board on the internal succession planning and the process from the perspective of the
Management Board. For the selection of suitable candidates, external and internal, the Nomination Committee takes into
account the balance and diversity of the knowledge, skills and experience of all members of the Management Board. It also
seeks to foster diversity on the Management Board, for example, with regard to gender, nationality and age. Building on the
work of the Nomination Committee, the Chairman’s Committee submits a recommendation for the Supervisory Board’s
resolution. Based on this, the Supervisory Board decides on the appointment of Management Board members. Besides
proposals for the appointment of members of the Management Board, the Chairman’s Committee also submits proposals for
the dismissal of Management Board members. The decision on such dismissal is the Supervisory Board’s responsibility.

Based on proposals of the Compensation Control Committee, the Supervisory Board determines the total compensation of
the individual members of the Management Board, resolves on the compensation system for the Management Board and
reviews it regularly.

The Supervisory Board receives reports from the Management Board at least within the scope prescribed by law or
administrative guidelines, in particular on all issues of relevance for the Group concerning strategy, intended business policy,
planning, business development, risk situation, risk management, staff development, reputation and compliance. Furthermore,
Group Audit informs the Audit Committee of any deficiencies identified regularly, and in the case of severe deficiencies without
undue delay. The Chairman of the Supervisory Board is informed accordingly of any serious findings relating to the members
of the Management Board. The Supervisory Board and Management Board adopted an Information Regime, which specifies
not only the reporting to the Supervisory Board, but also, among other things the Supervisory Board’s enquiries and requests
for information from employees of the company as well as the exchange of information in connection with preparations for the
meetings and between the meetings.

The Chairman of the Supervisory Board plays a crucial role in the proper functioning of the Supervisory Board and has a
leadership role in this. He can issue internal guidelines and principles concerning the Supervisory Board’s internal organiza tion
and communications, the coordination of the work within the Supervisory Board and the Supervisory Board’s interaction with
the Management Board. Between meetings, the Chairman of the Supervisory Board, and, to the extent expedient, the
chairpersons of the Supervisory Board committees, maintain regular contact with the members of the Management Board,
especially with the Chairperson of the Management Board, and deliberate with them, among other things, on issues of
Deutsche Bank Group’s strategy, planning, the development of its business, risk situation, risk management, risk controlling,
governance, compliance, compensation systems, IT, data and digitalization as well as material litigation cases. The Chairman
of the Supervisory Board and – within their respective functional responsibility – the chairpersons of the Supervisory Board
committees are informed without delay by the Chairman of the Management Board or by the respectively responsible
Management Board member about important events of material significance for the assessment of the situation, development
and management of Deutsche Bank Group. The Chairman of the Supervisory Board engages in discussions with investors
on Supervisory Board-related topics when necessary and regularly informs the Supervisory Board of the substance of such
discussions.




                                                                                                                            423
Deutsche Bank                                     Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                Supervisory Board




The types of business that require the approval of the Supervisory Board to be transacted are specified in the Article of
Association of Deutsche Bank AG. The Supervisory Board meets regularly without the Management Board. After due
consideration and insofar as materially appropriate, the Supervisory Board, or any of its committees, may, in order to perform
their tasks, consult auditors, legal advisors and other internal or external advisors. In performing their tasks, the Chairman of
the Supervisory Board, the chairpersons of the committees and the Supervisory Board members are supported by the Office
of the Supervisory Board, which is independent of the Management Board.

The Nomination Committee and Supervisory Board addressed the assessment prescribed by law of the Supervisory Board
pursuant to Section 25d of the German Banking Act (KWG), which is also the self-assessment of the Supervisory Board
pursuant to Section D.13 of the German Corporate Governance Code (GCGC) at several meetings. The concrete
implementation of and the schedule for the assessment were deliberated on and set out at the meetings of the Nomination
Committee on September 16, 2021 and October 25, 2021. Services of an external advisor were not mandated in this context.
The assessment was performed essentially on the basis of extensive questionnaires regarding the work of the Supervisory
Board, of the Supervisory Board committees and of the Management Board, individual interviews conducted by members of
the Nomination Committee with the members of the Management Board, and an assessment of the individual members of
both the Management Board and Supervisory Board. The final discussion of the assessment took place at the Supervisory
Board meeting in plenum on February 2, 2022, and the results were set out in a final report. The Supervisory Board continues
to hold the opinion that the Supervisory Board and Management Board have achieved a high standard and that there are no
reservations, in particular, regarding the professional qualifications, personal reliability and time availability of the members of
the Management Board and of the Supervisory Board.




                                                                                                                              424
Deutsche Bank                                                 Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                            Supervisory Board




Members of the Supervisory Board
The Supervisory Board has 20 members. In accordance with the German Co-Determination Act (Mitbestimmungsgesetz), it
comprises an equal number of shareholder representatives and employee representatives.

In accordance with the Articles of Association, the members of the Supervisory Board are elected for the period until the
conclusion of the General Meeting which adopts the resolutions concerning the ratification of the acts of management for the
fourth financial year following the beginning of the term of office. For the election of shareholder representatives, the General
Meeting may establish that the terms of office of individual members may begin or end on differing dates. In accordance with
the Terms of Reference for the Supervisory Board since July 2020, shareholder representatives are proposed to the General
Meeting for election for a maximum of approximately four years, i.e. until the conclusion of the General Meeting which adopts
the resolutions concerning the ratification of the acts of management for the third financial year following the beginning of the
term of office, whereby the financial year in which the term of office begins is not taken into account.

The following table shows information on the current members of our Supervisory Board.

Member                             Principal occupation                                          Supervisory board memberships and other directorships
Dr. Paul Achleitner                Chairman of the Supervisory Board,                            Bayer AG; Henkel AG & Co. KGaA (member of the
Year of birth: 1956                Deutsche Bank AG                                              Shareholders’ Committee)
First elected: May 31, 2012
Term expires: 2022
Ludwig Blomeyer-                   Spokesman of the Management Bremen, Deutsche Bank             Frowein & Co. Beteiligungs AG; Bürgschaftsbank Bremen
Bartenstein*                       AG                                                            GmbH (Member of the Board of Directors)
Year of birth: 1957
First elected: May 24, 2018
Term expires: 2023
Mayree Clark                       Supervisory Board member                                      Ally Financial, Inc. (Member of the Board of Directors),
Year of birth: 1957                                                                              Allvue Systems Holdings, Inc. (Member of the Board of
First elected: May 24, 2018                                                                      Directors) (since August 2021)
Term expires: 2023
Jan Duscheck*                      Head of National Working Group Banking,                       No memberships or directorships subject to disclosure
Year of birth: 1984                trade union ver.di (Vereinte Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft)
Appointed by the court:
August 2, 2016
Term expires: 2023
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck             Chief Information Security Officer, Aurora Innovation, Inc.   Onapsis Inc. (Member of the Board of Directors);
Year of birth: 1965                                                                              WootCloud Inc. (Member of the Board of Directors)
First elected: May 18, 2017
Term expires: 2022
Sigmar Gabriel                     Former German Federal Government Minister                     GP Günter Papenburg AG; Siemens Energy AG
Year of birth: 1959
Appointed      by   the   court:
March 11, 2020
Term expires: 2025
Timo Heider*                       Staff Council member                                          BHW Bausparkasse AG (Deputy Chairman); PCC Services
Year of birth: 1975                                                                              GmbH der Deutschen Bank (Deputy Chairman);
First elected: May 23, 2013                                                                      Pensionskasse der BHW Bausparkasse AG VVaG (Deputy
Term expires: 2023                                                                               Chairman)
Martina Klee*                      Staff Council member                                          Sterbekasse für die Angestellten der Deutsche Bank-
Year of birth: 1962                                                                              Gruppe VVaG
First elected: May 29, 2008
Term expires: 2023
Henriette Mark*                    Staff Council member                                          No memberships or directorships subject to disclosure
Year of birth: 1957
First elected: June 10, 2003
Term expires: 2023
Gabriele Platscher*                Staff Council member                                          BVV Versicherungsverein des Bankgewerbes a.G.
Year of birth: 1957                                                                              (Deputy Chairperson);
First elected: June 10, 2003                                                                     BVV Versorgungskasse des Bankgewerbes e.V.
Term expires: 2023                                                                               (Deputy Chairperson);
                                                                                                 BVV Pensionsfonds des Bankgewerbes AG
                                                                                                 (Deputy Chairperson)




                                                                                                                                                        425
Deutsche Bank                                                    Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                               Supervisory Board




Detlef Polaschek*                 Deputy Chairman of the Supervisory Board;Staff Council            No memberships of directorships subject to disclosure
Year of birth: 1960               member
First elected: May 24, 2018
Term expires: 2023
Bernd Rose*                       Staff Council member                                              Postbank Filialvertrieb AG; ver.di
Year of birth: 1967                                                                                 Vermögensverwaltungsgesellschaft m.b.H. (Deputy
First elected: May 23, 2013                                                                         Chairman)
Term expires: 2023
John Alexander Thain              Supervisory Board member                                          Uber Technologies Inc. (Member of the Board of Directors);
Year of birth: 1955                                                                                 Aperture Investors LLC (Member of the Board of Directors);
First elected: May 24, 2018                                                                         Pine Island Acquisition Corp. (Chairman of the Board of
Term expires: 2023                                                                                  Directors) (since January 2021)
Michele Trogni                    Operating Partner Eldridge                                        SE2 LLC (Chairperson of the Board of Directors); Horizon
Year of birth: 1965                                                                                 Acquisition Corporation (Member of the Board of Directors)
First elected: May 24, 2018                                                                         (until October 2021)
Term expires: 2023
Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel              Supervisory Board member                                          amedes Holding GmbH; Antin Infrastructure Partners S.A.
Year of birth: 1966                                                                                 (Member of the Board of Directors (since September 2021)
Appointed by the court:
August 1, 2019
Term expires: 2025
Stefan Viertel*                   Staff Council member                                              No memberships or directorships subject to disclosure
Year of birth: 1964
Succession as substitute
member:
January 1, 2021**
Term expires: 2023
Dr. Theodor Weimer                Chief Executive Officer, Deutsche Börse AG                        Knorr Bremse AG
Year of birth: 1959
First elected: May 20, 2020
Term expires: 2025
Frank Werneke*                    Chairman of the trade union ver.di (Vereinte                      ZDF Enterprises GmbH; Member of the Television Council
Year of birth: 1967               Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft                                       of the Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF); ver.di
Appointed by the court:                                                                             Vermögensgesellschaft m.b.H.
November 25, 2021
Term expires: 2023
Professor Dr. Norbert             Supervisory Board member                                          Bayer AG (Chairman); Heristo AG (Chairman) (until
Winkeljohann                                                                                        January 2021); Georgsmarienhütte Holding GmbH; Sievert
Year of birth: 1957                                                                                 AG (Chairman); Bohnenkamp AG (Chairman)
First elected: August 1, 2018
Term expires: 2023
Frank Witter                     Supervisory Board member                                           Traton SE; Vfl Wolfsburg-Fußball GmbH (Chairman);
Year of birth: 1959                                                                                 NorthVolt AB (until July 2021); CGI Inc. (Member of the
First elected: May 27, 2021                                                                         Board of Directors (since July 2021)
Term expires: 2025
* Employees representatives.
** Mr. Viertel already was a member of the Supervisory Board from August 1, 2010 to May 23, 2013.


On November 19, 2021, the Nomination Committee of Deutsche Bank’s Supervisory Board announced that it recommends
proposing Alexander Wynaendts for election to the Supervisory Board. From 2008 to 2020, he served as CEO of Aegon N.V.,
a leading European financial institution providing life insurance, pensions and asset management. The Supervisory Board
followed this recommendation and intends to propose to shareholders at the Annual General Meeting on May 19, 2022 that
Mr. Wynaendts be elected to the Supervisory Board. Subject to and following this election, the members of the Supervisory
Board intend to elect him as Chairman.




                                                                                                                                                          426
Deutsche Bank                                      Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                                 Supervisory Board




Objectives for the composition of the Supervisory Board, Profile of Requirements,
diversity concept and status of implementation
The composition of the Supervisory Board should ensure the effective and qualified control of and advice for the Management
Board of an internationally operating, broadly positioned bank. In this connection, its members as a whole must possess the
knowledge, abilities and expert experience to properly complete its tasks, and the members in their entirety of the Supervisory
Board and the Audit Committee must be familiar with the banking sector. Attention should be placed, in particular, on the
integrity, personality, willingness to perform, professionalism and independence of the individuals proposed for election.
Furthermore, the members must be able to devote sufficient time to performing their mandates. The objective is for the
Supervisory Board as a whole to possess all of the knowledge and experience considered to be essential while taking into
account the activities of Deutsche Bank Group, also with regard to the observance of the relevant bank supervisory regulations.

The suitability of each individual member to perform their mandate is assessed both internally and externally by the Nomination
Committee and the Supervisory Board as well as by regulatory authorities, determined and monitored continuously. The
suitability assessment covers the expertise, reliability and time available of the individual members. In addition, there is an
assessment of the knowledge, skills and experience of the Supervisory Board in its entirety that are necessary for it to perform
its control function (collective suitability). Passing the suitability assessment and the continual suitability of the Supervisory
Board member during the entire mandate with Deutsche Bank AG are mandatory regulatory prerequisites for the performance
of his or her work.

As set out in the Profile of Requirements for the Supervisory Board, each Supervisory Board member must have an
understanding of the fields of expertise specified below that is appropriate for the size and complexity of Deutsche Bank AG.
The Profile of Requirements was last discussed and subsequently adopted at the meeting of the Supervisory Board on
December 16, 2021 with an expansion in the fields of expertise to include Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) and
Anti-Money Laundering and the prevention of terrorist financing. Experts shall have profound expertise in the individual fields.

The fields of expertise include, in particular, the fields listed below:

– Knowledge in the areas of banking, financial services, financial markets and the financial industry, including the home
  market and the bank’s key markets outside Europe
– Knowledge of the relevant clients for the bank, the market expectations and the operational environment
– Risk management (investigation, assessment, mitigation, management and control of financial and non-financial risks,
  capital and liquidity management, shareholdings)
– Accounting (according to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the German Commercial Code (HGB))
  and audits of annual financial statements (financial expert)
– Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) as well as Corporate and Social Responsibility (CSR), including reporting
– Taxation
– Internal audit
– Compliance and internal controls
– Anti-Money Laundering and prevention of terrorist financing
– Strategic planning, business and risk strategies as well as their implementation
– Digitalization
– Information technology (IT), IT systems and IT security
– Regulatory framework and legal requirements, in particular, knowledge of the legal systems relevant for the bank
– Knowledge of the social, political and regulatory expectations in the home market
– Selection procedure for management body members and assessment of their suitability
– Governance and corporate culture
– Human resources and staff management
– Compensation and compensation systems (compensation expert)
– Management of a large, international regulated company
– Internal organization of the bank

The Supervisory Board believes that it complies with the specified concrete objectives regarding its composition and the Profile
of Requirements. The members of the Supervisory Board as a whole possess the knowledge, ability and expert experience
to properly complete their tasks.

The Supervisory Board shall be composed such that the number of independent members among the shareholder
representatives will be at least six. The following shareholder representatives are independent: Dr. Paul Achleitner,
Ms. Mayree Clark, Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck, Mr. Sigmar Gabriel, Mr. John Alexander Thain, Ms. Michele Trogni, Dr. Dagmar
Valcárcel, Dr. Theodor Weimer, Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann and Mr. Frank Witter. In the preceding financial year,
there were no former members of the Management Board on the Supervisory Board.




                                                                                                                            427
Deutsche Bank                                    Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                               Supervisory Board




There is a regular maximum age limit of 70. In well-founded, individual cases, a Supervisory Board member may be elected
or appointed for a period that extends at the latest until the end of the fourth Annual General Meeting that takes place after he
or she has reached the age of 70. This age limit was taken into account in the election proposals to the General Meeting and
shall also be taken into account for the next Supervisory Board elections or subsequent appointments for Supervisory Board
positions that become vacant.

For members of the Supervisory Board elected or appointed after July 2020, the length of each individual Supervisory Board
membership shall not, as a rule, exceed 12 years. Otherwise, the Supervisory Board member on the shareholder
representatives’ side will not be considered independent.

The Supervisory Board respects diversity when proposing members for appointment. In light of the international operations of
Deutsche Bank, care should be taken that the Supervisory Board has an appropriate number of members with long-term
international experience. Currently, the professional careers or private lives of five members of the Supervisory Board are
centered outside Germany. Furthermore, all of the shareholder representatives on the Supervisory Board have many years
of international experience from their current or former activities, for example, as management board members or chief
executive officers or in a comparable executive function of corporations or organizations with international operations. In these
two ways, the Supervisory Board believes the international activities of the company are sufficiently taken into account. The
objective is to retain the currently existing international profile.

Special importance has already been attached to an appropriate consideration of women in the selection process since the
Supervisory Board elections in 2008. For the election proposals to the General Meeting, the Supervisory Board takes into
account the recommendations of the Nomination Committee and the legal requirements according to which the Supervisory
Board shall be composed of at least 30 % women and at least 30 % men. In reviewing potential candidates for a new election
or subsequent appointments to Supervisory Board positions that have become vacant, qualified women are included in the
selection process and appropriately considered in the election proposals. At the end of the financial year, three women and
seven men were members of the Supervisory Board on both the employee representatives’ side and shareholder
representatives’ side. The statutory minimum quota of 30 % has thus been fulfilled for many years now.

The age structure is diverse, ranging from 38 to 66 years of age at the end of the financial year and spanning three generations,
according to the general definition of the term. The length of membership on the Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank ranged
from under one year to around 19 years at the end of the financial year.

The diverse range of the members’ educational and professional backgrounds includes banking, business administration,
economics, law, German studies, political science and information technology. The resumes of the members of the
Supervisory Board are published on Deutsche Bank’s website (www.db.com/ir/en/supervisory-board.htm).

The members of the Supervisory Board may not exercise functions on a management body of, or perform advisory duties at,
major competitors. Material conflicts of interest involving a member of the Supervisory Board that are not merely temporary
shall result in the termination of that member’s Supervisory Board mandate. Members of the Supervisory Board may not hold
more than the allowed number of supervisory board mandates according to Section 25d of the German Banking Act (KWG)
or mandates in supervisory bodies of companies which have similar requirements. These requirements were met in the
preceding financial year.

Some members of the Supervisory Board are, or were last year, in high-ranking positions at other companies that Deutsche
Bank has business relations with. Business transactions with these companies are conducted under the same conditions as
those between unrelated third parties. These transactions, in our opinion, do not affect the independence of the Supervisory
Board members involved.




                                                                                                                           428
Deutsche Bank                                  Management Board and Supervisory Board
Annual Report 2021                             Share Plans




Committees of the Supervisory Board
The Supervisory Board has established the following eight standing committees. Chairman’s Committee, Nomination
Committee, Audit Committee, Risk Committee, Integrity Committee, Compensation Control Committee, Strategy Committee
and Technology, Data and Innovation Committee. To the extent required, the committees coordinate their work and consult
each other on an ad hoc basis. The committee chairpersons report regularly to the Supervisory Board on the work of the
committees. The tasks and further details of the standing committees are regulated in separate Terms of Reference. The
current versions are available on the Deutsche Bank website (www.db.com/ir/en/documents.htm).

The members of the committees are listed below:

Chairman’s Committee: Dr. Paul Achleitner (Chairman), Frank Bsirske (until September 26, 2021), Detlef Polaschek, Frank
Werneke (since December 16, 2021), Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann

Nomination Committee: Mayree Clark, (Chairperson), Dr. Paul Achleitner, Frank Bsirske (until September 26, 2021), Detlef
Polaschek, Gerd Alexander Schütz (until January 28, 2021), Frank Werneke (since December 16, 2021), Professor Dr. Norbert
Winkeljohann (since February 3, 2021)

Audit Committee: Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann (Chairman), Dr. Paul Achleitner, Henriette Mark, Gabriele Platscher,
Detlef Polaschek, Bernd Rose, Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel, Stefan Viertel (since July 29, 2021), Dr. Theodor Weimer, Frank Witter
(since July 29, 2021)

Risk Committee: Mayree Clark (Chairperson), Dr. Paul Achleitner, Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein, Jan Duscheck, Michele
Trogni, Stefan Viertel, Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann

Integrity Committee: Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel (Chairperson), Dr. Paul Achleitner, Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein, Sigmar
Gabriel, Timo Heider, Gabriele Platscher

Compensation Control Committee: Dr. Paul Achleitner (Chairman), Frank Bsirske (until September 26, 2021), Dr. Gerhard
Eschelbeck (since February 3, 20219, Detlef Polaschek, Bernd Rose, Gerd Alexander Schütz (until February 1, 2021), Dr.
Dagmar Valcárcel, Frank Werneke (since December 16, 2021)

Strategy Committee: John Alexander Thain (Chairman), Dr. Paul Achleitner, Frank Bsirske (until September 26, 2021),
Mayree Clark, Timo Heider, Henriette Mark, Detlef Polaschek, Michele Trogni, Frank Werneke (since December 16, 2021)

Technology, Data and Innovation Committee: Michele Trogni (Chairperson), Dr. Paul Achleitner, Jan Duscheck,
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck, Timo Heider (since July 29, 2021), Martina Klee, Bernd Rose, Frank Witter (since July 29, 2021)

The Report of the Supervisory Board provides information on the concrete work of the committees over the preceding financial
year. In addition to the eight standing committees, the Mediation Committee, which is required by German law, makes
proposals to the Supervisory Board on the appointment or dismissal of members of the Management Board in cases where
the Supervisory Board is unable to reach a two-thirds majority decision. The Mediation Committee only meets if necessary.
Its members are: Dr. Paul Achleitner (Chairperson), Frank Bsirske (until September 26, 2021), Detlef Polaschek, Professor
Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann and Frank Werneke (since December 16, 2021).



Share Plans
For information on our employee share plans, please refer to the additional Note 33 “Employee Benefits” to the Consolidated
Financial Statements.




                                                                                                                      429
Deutsche Bank                                                       Related Party Transactions
Annual Report 2021                                                  Directors’ Share Ownership




Reporting and Transparency

Directors’ Share Ownership
Management Board: For information on the share ownership of the Management Board, please refer to our detailed
Compensation Report in the Management Report.

Supervisory Board: The members of our Supervisory Board held the following numbers of our shares and share awards under
our employee share plans.

                                                                                                                                              Number of           Number of
Members of the Supervisory Board                                                                                                                shares         share awards
Dr. Paul Achleitner                                                                                                                            145,000                    0
Ludwig Blomeyer-Bartenstein                                                                                                                      4,631                2,7391
Mayree Clark                                                                                                                                   109,444                    0
Jan Duscheck                                                                                                                                         0                    0
Dr. Gerhard Eschelbeck                                                                                                                               0                    0
Sigmar Gabriel                                                                                                                                       0                    0
Timo Heider                                                                                                                                          0                    0
Martina Klee                                                                                                                                     2,621                   10
Henriette Mark                                                                                                                                   1,524                    0
Gabriele Platscher                                                                                                                               1,615                   10
Detlef Polaschek                                                                                                                                   693                   10
Bernd Rose                                                                                                                                           0                    0
John Alexander Thain                                                                                                                           100,000                    0
Michele Trogni                                                                                                                                  15,000                    0
Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel                                                                                                                                 0                    0
Stefan Viertel                                                                                                                                   1,007                    0
Dr. Theodor Weimer                                                                                                                             108,000                    0
Frank Werneke                                                                                                                                        0                    0
Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann                                                                                                                   0                    0
Frank Witter                                                                                                                                         0                    0
Total                                                                                                                                          489,535                2,769
1
    Restricted Equity Awards. Mr. Blomeyer-Bartenstein has an entitlement linked to 2,739 shares through Restricted Equity Awards as part of his variable compensation. These
    are due in 2022 till 2026.


The members of the Supervisory Board held 489,535 shares, amounting to less than 0,02 % of our shares as of this Corporate
Governance Statement.

As listed in the “Number of share awards” column in the table, the members who are employees of Deutsche Bank hold
matching awards granted under the Global Share Purchase Plan, which are scheduled to be delivered to them on November 1,
2022, as well as Restricted Equity Awards (deferred share awards), which are granted to employees with deferred variable
compensation. The latter are marked separately in the table, and the further details concerning them as a compensation
instrument are reported in the section “Employee Compensation Report”.

As described in the “Management Report: Compensation Report: Compensation System for Supervisory Board Members”,
25 % of each member’s compensation for services as a member of the Supervisory Board for a given prior year is, rather than
being paid in cash, converted into notional shares of Deutsche Bank AG in February of the following year. The cash value of
the notional shares is paid to the member in February of the year following their departure from the Supervisory Board or the
expiration of their term of office, based on the market price of the Deutsche Bank share near the payment date.


Related Party Transactions
For information on related party transactions please refer to Note 36 “Related Party Transactions“.




                                                                                                                                                                       430
Deutsche Bank                                   Auditing and Controlling
Annual Report 2021                              Values and leadership principles of Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group




Auditing and Controlling

Audit Committee Financial Expert
The Supervisory Board determined that the following members of the Audit Committee are “Audit Committee Financial
Experts”, as such term is defined by the implementation rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission issued
pursuant to Section 407 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002: Dr. Paul Achleitner, Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel, Dr. Theodor Weimer,
Professor Dr. Norbert Winkeljohann and Frank Witter. These audit committee financial experts are “independent” of the bank,
as defined in Rule 10A-3 under the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In accordance with the provisions of Sections 107
(4) and 100 (5) of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG) as well as Section 25d (9) of the German Banking Act (KWG),
they have the required expert knowledge in financial accounting and auditing.



Compensation Control Committee Compensation Expert
Pursuant to Section 25d (12) of the German Banking Act (KWG), at least one member of the Compensation Control Committee
must have sufficient expertise and professional experience in the field of risk management and risk controlling, in particular,
with regard to the mechanisms to align compensation systems to the company’s overall risk appetite and strategy and the
bank’s capital base. The Supervisory Board determined that Dr. Paul Achleitner, Chairman of the Compensation Control
Committee, and Dr. Dagmar Valcárcel fulfill the requirements of Section 25d (12) of the German Banking Act (KWG) and
therefore have the required expertise and professional experience in risk management and risk controlling as Compensation
Control Committee Compensation Experts”..



Values and leadership principles of Deutsche Bank AG and
Deutsche Bank Group
Deutsche Bank Group Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics for Senior Financial
Officers
Deutsche Bank Group’s Code of Conduct sets out Deutsche Banks’s purpose, values and beliefs and minimum standards of
conduct that we expect all members of our Management Board and employees to follow. These values and standards govern
employee interactions with our clients, competitors, business partners, government and regulatory authorities, and
shareholders, as well as with other employees. In addition, the Code forms the cornerstone of our policies, which provide
guidance on compliance with applicable laws and regulations.

In accordance with Section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, we adopted a Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers
of Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group with special obligations that apply to our “Senior Financial Officers”, which
currently consist of Deutsche Bank’s Chairman of the Management Board and the Chief Financial Officer as well as certain
other Senior Financial Officers. There were no amendments or waivers to this Code of Ethics in 2021.

The current versions of the Code of Conduct as well as the Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers of Deutsche Bank AG
and Deutsche Bank Group are available from Deutsche Bank’s website: www.db.com/ir/en/documents.htm.




                                                                                                                               431
Deutsche Bank                                    Auditing and Controlling
Annual Report 2021                               Principal accountant fees and services




Corporate Governance at Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group
Deutsche Bank established a Group Governance function to define, implement and monitor the corporate governance
framework of Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group and to perform this governance function throughout the Group.
Group Governance addresses corporate governance issues in Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group, while focusing
closely on clear organizational structures aligned to the key elements of good corporate governance.

Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank Group are committed to ensuring a corporate governance framework in accordance
with international standards and statutory provisions. In support of this objective, Deutsche Bank AG and Deutsche Bank
Group have instituted clear corporate governance principles.

Further details on corporate governance are published on Deutsche Bank’s website (www.db.com/ir/en/corporate-
governance.htm).



Principal accountant fees and services
In accordance with German law, our principal accountant is appointed at our Annual General Meeting based on a
recommendation of our Supervisory Board. The Audit Committee of our Supervisory Board prepares such a recommendation.
Subsequent to the principal accountant’s appointment, the Audit Committee awards the contract and in its sole authority
approves the terms and scope of the audit and all audit engagement fees as well as monitors the principal accountant’s
independence. Ernst & Young GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft („EY“) was our principal accountant for the 2020 and
2021 fiscal years, respectively.

The tables set forth below contain the aggregate fees billed for each of the last two fiscal years by EY in each of the following
categories: (1) Audit fees, which are fees for professional services for the audit of our annual financial statements or services
that are normally provided by the accountant in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements for those fiscal
years, (2) Audit-related fees, which are fees for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to the performance
of the audit or review of our financial statements and are not reported as Audit fees, (3) Tax-related fees, which are fees for
professional services rendered for tax compliance, tax consulting and tax planning, and (4) All other fees, which are fees for
products and services other than Audit fees, Audit-related fees and Tax-related fees. These amounts include expenses and
exclude Value Added Tax (VAT).

Fees billed by EY
Fee category in € m.                                                                                          2021           2020
Audit fees                                                                                                     54              53
Audit-related fees                                                                                              8               5
Tax-related fees                                                                                                1               0
All other fees                                                                                                  1               0
                                                                                                   1
Total fees                                                                                                     64              58


The Audit fees include fees for professional services for the audit of our annual financial statements and consolidated financial
statements and do not include audit fees for DWS and its subsidiaries that are not audited by EY. The Audit-related fees
include fees for other assurance services required by law or regulations, in particular for financial service specific attestation,
for quarterly reviews, for spin-off audits and for merger audits, as well as fees for voluntary assurance services, like voluntary
audits for internal management purposes and the issuance of comfort letters. Our Tax-related fees include fees for services
relating to the preparation and review of tax returns and related compliance assistance and advice, tax consultation and advice
relating to Group tax planning strategies and initiatives and assistance with assessing compliance with tax regulations.

Under SEC regulations, the principal accountant fees are required to be presented as follows: audit fees were € 56 million in
2021 compared to € 55 million in 2020, audit-related fees were € 6 million in 2021 compared to € 3 million in 2020, tax-related
fees were € 1 million in 2021 compared to € 0 million in 2020, and all other fees were € 1 million in 2021 compared to € 0
million in 2020.




                                                                                                                             432
Deutsche Bank                                   Auditing and Controlling
Annual Report 2021                              Principal accountant fees and services




United States law and regulations, and our own policies, generally require that all engagements of our principal accountant
be pre-approved by our Audit Committee or pursuant to policies and procedures adopted by it. Our Audit Committee has
adopted the following policies and procedures for consideration and approval of requests to engage our principal accountant
to perform non-audit services. Engagement requests must in the first instance be submitted to the Accounting Engagement
Team. If the request relates to services that would impair the independence of our principal accountant, the request must be
rejected. Our Audit Committee has given its pre-approval for specified assurance, financial advisory and tax services, provided
the expected fees for any such service do not exceed € 1 million. If the engagement request relates to such specified pre-
approved services, it may be approved by the Accounting Engagement Team and must thereafter be reported to the Audit
Committee. If the engagement request relates neither to prohibited non-audit services nor to pre-approved non-audit services,
it must be forwarded to the Audit Committee for consideration. In addition, to facilitate the consideration of engagement
requests between its meetings, the Audit Committee has delegated approval authority to several of its members who are
“independent” as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange. Such members
are required to report any approvals made by them to the Audit Committee at its next meeting.

Additionally, United States law and regulations permit the pre-approval requirement to be waived with respect to engagements
for non-audit services aggregating to no more than five percent of the total amount of revenues we paid to our principal
accountant, if such engagements were not recognized by us at the time of engagement and were promptly brought to the
attention of our Audit Committee or a designated member thereof and approved prior to the completion of the audit. In 2020
and 2021, the percentage of the total amount of revenues we paid to our principal accountant for non-audit services that was
subject to such a waiver was less than 5 % for each year.




                                                                                                                         433
Deutsche Bank                                   Compliance with the German Corporate Governance Code
Annual Report 2021                              Declaration pursuant to Section 161 German Stock Corporation Act (AktG) (Declaration of Conformity
                                                2021)




Compliance with the German Corporate Governance
Code

Declaration pursuant to Section 161 German Stock Corporation
Act (AktG) (Declaration of Conformity 2021)
In updating the Declaration of Conformity last issued on October 30, 2020, the Management Board and Supervisory Board of
Deutsche Bank AG approved the following Declaration of Conformity on October 29, 2021.

“The Management Board and Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft state pursuant to Section 161 German
Stock Corporation Act (AktG):

1.   The last Declaration of Conformity was issued on October 30, 2020. As of this date on, Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
     complied with the recommendations of the “Government Commission on the German Corporate Governance Code” in
     the Code version dated December 16, 2019, and published in the Federal Gazette (Bundesanzeiger) on March 20, 2020,
     with the following deviations: Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft deviated from recommendation G.1, first bullet point,
     according to which the compensation system for Management Board members – among other things – shall define “the
     amount that the total remuneration must not exceed (maximum remuneration).” Although the compensation system did
     provide for a maximum compensation, this did not include the service costs for contributions to the company pension
     plan for the members of the Management Board.

     By resolution of the Supervisory Board on February 3, 2021, which was approved by the General Meeting on May 27,
     2021, with regard to the compensation system, the maximum compensation was adjusted in conformity with the Code
     with retroactive effect as of January 1, 2021, to that the bank has complied with all of the recommendations of the German
     Corporate Governance Code applicable to credit institutions since then. The German Corporate Governance Code limits
     the applicability of the Code’s recommendations to credit institutions and insurance companies to the extent that the
     recommendations apply to them only insofar as there are no statutory provisions to the contrary. Deutsche Bank
     Aktiengesellschaft last reported on these statutory regulations and the effects for the Declaration of Conformity in its
     Corporate Governance Statement in the Annual Report 2020.

2.   Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft complies with all of the recommendations applicable to it and will also comply with
     them in the future.


Frankfurt am Main, in October 2021

The Management Board                                                                The Supervisory Board
of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft                                                 of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft”




                                                                                                                                            434
Deutsche Bank                                    Compliance with the German Corporate Governance Code
Annual Report 2021                               Goals for the proportion of women in management positions/gender quota




Inapplicable Code recommendations due to the precedence of
statutory provisions
Pursuant to the recommendation in Section F.4 of the German Corporate Governance Code in the version of December 16,
2019, companies subject to special legal regulations shall specify in the Corporate Governance Statement which Code
recommendations were not applicable due to over-riding legal stipulations.

For Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, this currently applies to the recommendation in Section D.5 of the German Corporate
Governance Code in the version of December 16, 2019, which states that the Supervisory Board shall form a Nomination
Committee composed exclusively of shareholder representatives.

Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, as a supervised credit institution, is subject to the special legal regulations of the German
Banking Act (KWG). The Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft has to establish a Nomination Committee
in accordance with Section 25d (11) of the German Banking Act (KWG) whose tasks are to support the Supervisory Board in
the following tasks:

– identifying candidates to fill a position on the Management Board and preparing proposals for the election of members of
  the Supervisory Board;
– drawing up an objective to promote the representation of the under-represented gender on the Supervisory Board as well
  as a strategy for achieving this;
– the regular assessment, to be performed at least once a year, of the structure, size, composition and performance of the
  Management Board and of the Supervisory Board and making recommendations regarding this to the Supervisory Board;
– the regular assessment, to be performed at least once a year, of the knowledge, skills and experience of the individual
  members of the Management Board and of the Supervisory Board as well as of the respective body collectively; and
– the review of the Management Board’s principles for selecting and appointing persons to the upper management level and
  the recommendations made to the Management Board in this respect.

The Nomination Committee to be established in accordance with the German Banking Act (KWG) therefore has numerous
tasks that go beyond the preparation of the election proposals for the shareholder representatives on the Supervisory Board.
A general exclusion of a supervisory board’s employee representatives from a membership on a committee is only admissible,
according to prevailing opinion, if there is a material reason for this. Whereas such a material reason can exist for a committee
that solely handles the preparation of the proposals to the General Meeting for the election of shareholder representatives, a
justification for the exclusion of employee representatives is lacking for a nomination committee with the range of tasks
assigned to it by the German Banking Act (KWG). Due to the Nomination Committee’s range of mandatory tasks stipulated
by the German Banking Act (KWG) and the inadmissibility of discriminating against employee representatives in the
composition of the committees, the recommendation in Section D.5 of the German Corporate Governance Code is therefore
not applicable to Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft. Nonetheless, in order to take this recommendation into account, Section
2 (3) of the Terms of Reference for the Nomination Committee provides that the election proposals to the General Meeting
are prepared only by the shareholder representatives on the Nomination Committee.



Goals for the proportion of women in management
positions/gender quota
As of the date of this Corporate Governance Statement, the percentage of women on the Supervisory Board of Deutsche
Bank AG is 30 %. The statutory minimum of 30 % pursuant to Section 96 (2) of the German Stock Corporation Act (AktG) is
thereby fulfilled.

On July 27, 2017, the Supervisory Board set a goal of at least 20 % for the percentage of female members of the Management
Board as of June 30, 2022. For a Management Board size of between eight and 12 members, this corresponds to two women.
When the decision was made two women were members of the Management Board. At the end of the financial year and as
of the date of this Statement, there are two women on the Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG, Christiana Riley and
Rebecca Short.

In accordance with the legal framework conditions and based on the bank’s own strategy on diversity and inclusion on May 4,
2021 the Management Board renewed its goals for the representation of women at the two management levels below the
Management Board: These goals are now at least 30 % at the first management level and at least 30 % at the second
management level below the Management Board, and are to be reached by December 31, 2025. These goals were also
announced at the bank’s Sustainability Deep Dive on May 20, 2021. Deutsche Bank believes that improved gender balance
in leadership roles will meaningfully contribute to the bank's future success and hence set more ambitious goals.



                                                                                                                           435
Deutsche Bank                                                   Compliance with the German Corporate Governance Code
Annual Report 2021                                              Diversity concept




The population of the first management level comprises Managing Directors and Directors who report directly to the
Management Board and managers with comparable responsibilities. The population of the second management level
comprises Managing Directors and Directors who report to the first management level.

Implementing German gender quota legislation at Deutsche Bank AG
in %                                                                                          Status as of    Status as of      Target for      Target for
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                    Dec 31, 2020    Dec 31, 2021    Dec 31, 2020    Jun 30, 2022
Women on the Supervisory Board                                                                    30.0 %          30.0 %          30.0 %               -
Women on the Management Board                                                                     10.0 %          20.0 %                -        20.0 %
First management level below the Management Board                                                 20.0 %          20.0 %          20.0 %               -
Second management level below the Management Board                                                23.9 %          27.5 %          25.0 %               -
1
    Legal requirement.
2
    For a Management Board size of between eight and 12 members, this corresponds to two women.


As of December 31, 2021, the proportion of women is 20 % (2020: 20 %) in the first management level below the Management
Board and 27,5 % (2020: 23,9 %) on the second management level below the Management Board.

Key conditions have changed since the goal was set in September 2015 for the percentage of women on the two levels below
the Management Board. These changes include the bank’s transformation program approved in July 2019, as well as our
decisions regarding the IPO of DWS and the merging of the DB Privat- and Firmenkundenbank AG into Deutsche Bank AG.
Furthermore, our extensive cost reduction program imposed restrictions on hiring and appointments at these two levels. In
fact, the already relatively low number of employees on the two levels below the Management Board declined further in the
period since September 2015, by nearly 36 % (2020: 36 %). Small changes in absolute numbers led to relatively high
fluctuations in terms of percentages.

While our commitment to increase representation of women in senior leadership positions is global our implementation is local.
Each region, each business has its own diversity and inclusion needs because cultures and current social challenges differ
from nation to nation and from business area to business area. However, the Management Board remains committed to these
goals and focused initiatives are put in place to accelerate change. These initiatives impact on the full lifecycle of people
spanning across Talent Attraction, Talent Development, Talent Retention and Promotion.

Within this framework, our decisions on promotions and appointments are aligned, in particular, to the suitability of the
candidates for the respective roles, their demonstrated performance and their future potential. In line with our basic diversity
concept, we also take into account the knowledge and skills required for the proper performance of tasks and the necessary
experience of the employees for the composition of the two levels below the Management Board.



Diversity concept
As an integral part of our strategy as a leading European bank with a global reach and a strong home market in Germany,
Diversity is a decisive factor for our success. Diversity & Inclusion help Deutsche Bank in forming sustainable relationships
with our clients and partners and in taking part in the societies where we do business.

Age, gender as well as educational and professional backgrounds have long been accepted as key aspects of our far more
comprehensive understanding of Diversity at Deutsche Bank.

We are convinced that Diversity & Inclusion stimulate innovation, for example, and help us to take more balanced decisions
and thus play a decisive role for the success of Deutsche Bank. Diversity & Inclusion are therefore integral components of the
bank’s values and beliefs and its Code of Conduct.

The Supervisory Board and Management Board strive to and should serve as role models for the bank regarding Diversity &
Inclusion. In accordance with our values and beliefs specified above, diversity in the composition of the Supervisory Board
and the Management Board also facilitates the proper performance of the tasks and duties assigned to them by law, the
Articles of Association and Terms of Reference.

Based on Deutsche Bank’s understanding of Diversity & Inclusion, the values and beliefs and the measures described in the
following for their implementation also apply – to the extent legally admissible – to the Supervisory Board and the Management
Board of Deutsche Bank AG. The Supervisory Board considers diversity in the company, in particular, when filling positions
on the Management Board and Supervisory Board.




                                                                                                                                                    436
Deutsche Bank                                  Compliance with the German Corporate Governance Code
Annual Report 2021                             Diversity concept




On December 16, 2021, the Supervisory Board of Deutsche Bank AG updated the Suitability Guideline for selecting members
of the Supervisory Board and Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG, which also continues to comprise diversity principles.
This Suitability Guideline implements the “Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management
body and key function holders” issued jointly by the European Banking Authority and European Securities and Markets
Authority.


Diversity concept for the Supervisory Board
The diversity concept for the Supervisory Board and its implementation are described above in the section “Objectives for the
composition of the Supervisory Board, Profile of Requirements, diversity concept and status of implementation”.


Diversity concept and succession planning for the Management Board
Through the composition of the Management Board, it is to be ensured that its members have, at all times, the required
knowledge, skills and experience necessary to properly perform their tasks. Accordingly, when selecting members for the
Management Board, care is to be taken that they collectively have sufficient expertise and diversity within the meaning of
our objectives specified above. Furthermore, the Supervisory Board and the Management Board should ensure long-term
succession planning.

By way of resolution of the Supervisory Board, the Management Board should be composed of at least 20 % women by June
30, 2022. For a Management Board size of between eight and 12 members, this corresponds to two women.

In general, a Management Board member should not be older at the end of his or her appointment period than the regular
retirement age according to the rules of the statutory pension insurance scheme applicable in Germany for the long-term
insured to claim an early retirement pension.


Implementation
In accordance with the law, the Articles of Association and Terms of Reference, the Supervisory Board adopted candidate
profiles for the members of the Management Board, based on a proposal from the Nomination Committee. These profiles
take into account an “Expertise and Capability Matrix”, specifying, among other things, the required knowledge, skills and
experience to perform the tasks as Management Board member, in order to successfully develop and implement the bank’s
strategy in the respective market or the respective division and as a management body collectively. The Management Board
reviews succession plans for Management Board positions, both individually and as a group. Successions plans are
reviewed and succession candidates are discussed in detail based on potential, leadership, fit and proper suitability. As
gender diversity is a key focus of Deutsche Bank respective succession metrics and data analytics support this process.
After approval by the Management Board these plans are submitted to the Nomination Committee and the Supervisory
Board in principle at a meeting for extensive deliberation.

In identifying candidates to fill a position on the bank’s Management Board, the Supervisory Board’s Nomination Committee
takes into account the appropriate diversity balance of all Management Board members collectively. Furthermore, it also
considers the targets set by the Supervisory Board in accordance with statutory requirements for the percentage of women
on the Management Board.

The Nomination Committee supports the Supervisory Board with the periodic assessment, to be performed at least once a
year, of the knowledge, skills and experience of the individual members of the Management Board and of the Management
Board in its entirety.




                                                                                                                       437
Deutsche Bank                                  Compliance with the German Corporate Governance Code
Annual Report 2021                             Diversity concept




Results achieved in the 2021 financial year
At the end of the financial year, the Management Board comprised two women (20 %) and nine men. The target of 20 % of
the members or two women adopted for June 30, 2022 for the Management Board was met. As of the date of this Corporate
Governance Statement, the Management Board of Deutsche Bank AG comprised two women and eight men.

The age structure is diverse, ranging from 43 to 56 years of age as of the date of this Corporate Governance Statement. As
of the date of this Corporate Governance Statement the length of experience as member of the Management Board of
Deutsche Bank ranged from under one year to around nine years.

Also with our strategy in mind of being a leading European bank with a global reach and a strong home market in Germany,
six of the ten Management Board members as of the date of this Corporate Governance Statement have a German
background. The other members of the Management Board come from Italy, the United Kingdom, New Zealand and the USA.
However, the ethnic diversity of the Management Board does not currently reflect the full diversity of the markets where we
do business or the diversity of our employees.

The diverse range of the members’ educational and professional backgrounds includes banking, business administration,
economics, law, linguistics and engineering.

The bank transparently reports on Management Board diversity in addition to the information presented above in this Corporate
Governance Report in the section “Management Board and Supervisory Board:

Management Board” as well as on the bank’s website: www.db.com (Heading “Corporate Governance”, “Management
Board”).




                                                                                                                       438
5
Supplementary Information
(­Unaudited)




440   Non-GAAP Financial Measures
449   Declaration of Backing
450   Group Five-Year Record
451   Imprint / Publications
Deutsche Bank                                                      Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                 Return on Equity Ratios




Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This document and other documents the Group has published or may publish contain non-GAAP financial measures. Non-
GAAP financial measures are measures of the Group’s historical or future performance, financial position or cash flows that
contain adjustments that exclude or include amounts that are included or excluded, as the case may be, from the most directly
comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS in the Group’s financial statements.



Return on Equity Ratios
The Group reports a post-tax return on average shareholders’ equity and a post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’
equity, each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure.

The post-tax returns on average shareholders’ equity and average tangible shareholders' equity are calculated as profit (loss)
attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders after AT1 coupon as a percentage of average shareholders’ equity and average
tangible shareholders' equity, respectively.

Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders after AT1 coupon for the segments is a non-GAAP financial measure
and is defined as profit (loss) excluding post-tax profit (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests and after AT1 coupon,
which are allocated to segments based on their allocated average tangible shareholders’ equity. For the Group, it reflects the
reported effective tax rate, which was 26 % for the full year 2021, 39 % for 2020 and (100) % for 2019. For the segments, the
applied tax rate was 28 % for all reported periods in 2021, 2020 and 2019.

At the Group level, tangible shareholders' equity is shareholders’ equity as reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheet
excluding goodwill and other intangible assets. Tangible shareholders’ equity for the segments is calculated by deducting
goodwill and other intangible assets from shareholders’ equity as allocated to the segments. Shareholders’ equity and tangible
shareholders’ equity are presented on an average basis.

The Group believes that a presentation of average tangible shareholders’ equity makes comparisons to its competitors easier
and refers to this measure in the return on equity ratios presented by the Group. However, average tangible shareholders’
equity is not a measure provided for in IFRS, and the Group’s ratios based on this measure should not be compared to other
companies’ ratios without considering differences in the calculations.

The reconciliation of the aforementioned ratios is set forth in the table below:

                                                                                                                                                                 2021
in € m.                                             Corporate         Investment            Private           Asset              Capital        Corporate &
(unless stated otherwise)                               Bank                Bank              Bank       Management         Release Unit             Other       Total
Profit (loss) before tax                               1,000              3,715                366                816             (1,364)            (1,143)    3,390
Profit (loss)                                            720              2,675                263                587               (982)              (754)    2,510
Profit (loss) attributable to
noncontrolling interests                                    0                  0                  0                  0                  0              144       144
Profit (loss) attributable to DB
shareholders and additional
equity components                                        720              2,675                263                587               (982)             (898)     2,365
  Profit (loss) attributable to additional
  equity components                                        81               195                 97                 16                 37                  0      426
  Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche
  Bank shareholders                                      639              2,480                167                571             (1,019)             (898)     1,940

Average allocated shareholders' equity                10,301             24,181            12,663               4,815             4,473                   0    56,434
Deduct: Average allocated goodwill
and other intangible assets1                             721              1,087              1,256              2,889                 96                  0     6,049
Average allocated tangible
shareholders' equity                                   9,580             23,094            11,408               1,926             4,377                   0    50,385
Post-tax return on average
shareholders’ equity                                   6.2 %            10.3 %               1.3 %            11.9 %           (22.8) %                N/M     3.4 %
Post-tax return on average
tangible shareholders’ equity                          6.7 %            10.7 %               1.5 %            29.7 %           (23.3) %                N/M     3.8 %
N/M – Not meaningful
1
  Goodwill and other intangible assets related to the share of DWS that is not held by Deutsche Bank are excluded since the first quarter of 2018.




                                                                                                                                                                440
Deutsche Bank                                                      Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                 Return on Equity Ratios




                                                                                                                                                                   2020
in € m.                                             Corporate         Investment            Private           Asset              Capital        Corporate &
(unless stated otherwise)                               Bank                Bank              Bank       Management         Release Unit             Other         Total
Profit (loss) before tax                                 539              3,166                 (99)              544             (2,200)             (929)      1,021
Profit (loss)                                            388              2,280                 (71)              392             (1,584)             (780)        624
Profit (loss) attributable to
noncontrolling interests                                    0                  0                  0                  0                  0              129         129
Profit (loss) attributable to DB
shareholders and additional
equity components                                        388              2,280                 (71)              392             (1,584)             (909)        495
  Profit (loss) attributable to additional
  equity components                                        72               169                 79                 14                 48                  0        382
  Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche
  Bank shareholders                                      315              2,111               (151)               378             (1,632)             (909)        113

Average allocated shareholders' equity                 9,945             22,911            11,553               4,757             6,166                   0     55,332
Deduct: Average allocated goodwill
and other intangible assets1                             603              1,133              1,255              2,993                142                 (0)     6,127
Average allocated tangible
shareholders' equity                                   9,341             21,777            10,298               1,764             6,024                   0     49,205
Post-tax return on average
shareholders’ equity                                   3.2 %              9.2 %            (1.3) %             7.9 %           (26.5) %                N/M       0.2 %
Post-tax return on average
tangible shareholders’ equity                          3.4 %              9.7 %            (1.5) %            21.4 %           (27.1) %                N/M       0.2 %
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Goodwill and other intangible assets related to the share of DWS that is not held by Deutsche Bank are excluded since the first quarter of 2018.


                                                                                                                                                                   2019
in € m.                                             Corporate         Investment            Private           Asset              Capital        Corporate &
(unless stated otherwise)                               Bank                Bank              Bank       Management         Release Unit             Other         Total
Profit (loss) before tax                                   86               496               (263)               468             (3,170)              (251)     (2,634)
Profit (loss)                                              62               357               (189)               337             (2,283)            (3,549)     (5,265)
Profit (loss) attributable to
noncontrolling interests                                    0                  0                  0                  0                  0              125         125
Profit (loss) attributable to DB
shareholders and additional
equity components                                          62               357               (189)               337             (2,283)            (3,673)     (5,390)
  Profit (loss) attributable to additional
  equity components                                        62               137                 64                 11                 54                  0        328
  Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche
  Bank shareholders                                        (0)              221               (253)               325             (2,337)            (3,673)     (5,718)

Average allocated shareholders' equity                10,340             21,736            11,663               4,865             7,253              4,314      60,170
Deduct: Average allocated goodwill
and other intangible assets1                             491              1,277              1,318              3,050                117             1,274       7,528
Average allocated tangible
shareholders' equity                                   9,849             20,458            10,345               1,815             7,136              3,039      52,643
Post-tax return on average
shareholders’ equity                                 (0.0) %              1.0 %            (2.2) %             6.7 %           (32.2) %                N/M      (9.5) %
Post-tax return on average
tangible shareholders’ equity                        (0.0) %              1.1 %            (2.4) %            17.9 %           (32.8) %                N/M     (10.9) %
N/M – Not meaningful
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Goodwill and other intangible assets related to the share of DWS that is not held by Deutsche Bank are excluded since the first quarter of 2018.




                                                                                                                                                                  441
Deutsche Bank                                                         Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                    Core Bank




Adjusted post-tax return (Group)
The Group believes that a presentation of Adjusted post-tax return makes comparisons to its competitors easier.

in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                             2021       2020       2019
Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders                                             1,940        113      (5,718)
Specific revenue items                                                                                  (73)       (30)         8
Transformation charges                                                                               1,003        490       1,145
Impairment of goodwill / other intangibles                                                                5          0      1,037
Restructuring & severance                                                                              470        688         805
Tax adjustments                                                                                       (392)      (313)      2,000
  of which: Tax effect of above adjustment items1                                                     (393)      (321)       (839)
  of which: Adjustments for share based payment related effects                                           1        (29)        54
  of which: Adjustments for DTA valuation adjustments                                                     0         37      2,785
Adjusted profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders                                    2,952        947        (723)
Average allocated tangible shareholders' equity                                                     50,385     49,205      52,643
Adjusted post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity                                    5.9 %      1.9 %     (1.4) %
1
    Pre-tax adjustments taxed at a rate of 28 %.




Core Bank
The Core Bank represents the Group excluding the Capital Release Unit (CRU).

The following table presents the results of the Core Bank

in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                             2021       2020        2019
Profit (loss) before tax                                                                             4,754      3,221        536
Profit (loss)                                                                                        3,491      2,208     (2,982)
Profit (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests                                                 144        129        125
Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders and additional equity components            3,347      2,079     (3,107)
  Profit (loss) attributable to additional equity components                                           388        334        274
  Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders                                           2,959      1,745     (3,381)

Average allocated shareholders' equity                                                              51,961     49,166      52,918
Deduct: Average allocated goodwill and other intangible assets                                       5,953      5,985       7,411
Average allocated tangible shareholders' equity                                                     46,008     43,181      45,507
Post-tax return on average shareholders’ equity                                                      5.7 %      3.5 %     (6.4) %
Post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity                                             6.4 %      4.0 %     (7.4) %
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure


The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted profit (loss) before tax of the Core Bank

in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                             2021       2020        2019
Profit (loss) before tax - Group                                                                     3,390      1,021     (2,634)
Profit (loss) before tax - CRU                                                                      (1,364)    (2,200)    (3,170)
Profit (loss) before tax - Core Bank                                                                 4,754      3,221        536
Specific revenue items                                                                                 (74)       (38)      (108)
Transformation charges                                                                                 945        328        635
Impairment of goodwill / other intangibles                                                               5          0      1,037
Restructuring & severance                                                                              464        671        649
Adjusted profit (loss) before tax – Core Bank                                                        6,093      4,182      2,749
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure




                                                                                                                            442
Deutsche Bank                                                         Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                    Adjusted costs




Adjusted post-tax return (Core Bank)
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity of the Core
Bank.

in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                             2021       2020        2019
Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders                                             2,959      1,745      (3,381)
Specific revenue items                                                                                  (74)       (38)      (108)
Transformation charges                                                                                 945        328         635
Impairment of goodwill / other intangibles                                                                5          0      1,037
Restructuring & severance                                                                              464        671         649
Tax adjustments                                                                                       (374)      (261)      2,219
  of which: Tax effect of above adjustment items1                                                     (375)      (269)       (620)
  of which: Adjustments for share based payment related effects                                           1        (29)        54
  of which: Adjustments for DTA valuation adjustments                                                     0         37      2,785
Adjusted profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders                                    3,924      2,445       1,051
Average allocated tangible shareholders' equity                                                     46,008     43,181      45,507
Adjusted post-tax return on average tangible shareholders’ equity                                    8.5 %      5.7 %       2.3 %
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure
1
  Pre-tax adjustments taxed at a rate of 28 %




Transformation charges
Transformation charges are costs, included in adjusted costs, that are directly related to Deutsche Bank’s transformation as
a result of the strategy announced on July 7, 2019 and certain costs related to incremental or accelerated decisions driven by
the changes in the expected operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Such charges include the transformation-related
impairment of software and real estate, the accelerated software amortization and other transformation charges like onerous
contract provisions or legal and consulting fees related to the strategy execution. The table represents the transformation
charges by the respective cost category.

in € m.                                                                                               2021       2020        2019
Compensation and benefits                                                                                8          8           0
Information Technology                                                                                 689        257         977
Professional services                                                                                   35         18          12
Occupancy                                                                                              258        196         137
Communication, data services, marketing                                                                  4          7           0
Other                                                                                                    8          4          18
Transformation charges                                                                               1,003        490       1,145




Adjusted costs
Adjusted costs is one of the Group’s key performance indicators and is a non-GAAP financial measure for which the most
directly comparable IFRS financial measure is noninterest expenses. Adjusted costs is calculated by deducting (i) impairment
of goodwill and other intangible assets, (ii) net litigation charges and (iii) restructuring and severance (in total referred to as
nonoperating costs) from noninterest expenses under IFRS. The Group believes that a presentation of noninterest expenses
excluding the impact of these items provides a more meaningful depiction of the costs associated with the operating
businesses. To show the development of the cost initiatives excluding costs that are directly related to Deutsche Bank’s
transformation as a result of the strategy announced on July 7, 2019, the Group also presents Adjusted costs excluding
transformation charges, in which the transformation charges described above are deducted from Adjusted costs.

BNP Paribas and Deutsche Bank signed a master transaction agreement to provide continuity of service to Deutsche Bank’s
Prime Finance and Electronic Equities clients. Under the agreement Deutsche Bank operated the platform until clients could
be migrated to BNP Paribas by the end of 2021. Expenses of the transferred business were eligible for reimbursement by
BNP Paribas. To show the development of the cost initiatives excluding not only transformation charges but also these eligible
reimbursable expenses, the Group also presents Adjusted costs excluding transformation charges and expenses eligible for
reimbursement related to Prime Finance.




                                                                                                                             443
Deutsche Bank                                                         Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                    Adjusted costs




                                                                                                                                                         2021
                                                  Corporate           Investment         Private         Asset          Capital    Corporate &            Total
in € m.                                               Bank                  Bank           Bank     Management     Release Unit         Other     consolidated
Noninterest expenses                                  4,153               5,830          7,423          1,664           1,432           1,004         21,505
Impairment of goodwill and other
intangible assets                                         5                   0              0              0               0               0              5
Litigation charges, net                                   2                  99            134              2             230               1            466
Restructuring and severance                             111                  87            237             21               6               7            470
Adjusted costs                                        4,036               5,644          7,051          1,641           1,195             996         20,564
Transformation charges                                   58                  60            221              3              57             603          1,003
Adjusted costs ex. transformation
charges                                               3,978               5,584          6,830          1,638           1,138             393         19,561
Expenses eligible for reimbursement
related to Prime Finance                                                                                                                                  302
Adjusted costs ex. transformation
charges and expenses eligible for
reimbursement related to Prime
Finance                                                                                                                                               19,259




                                                                                                                                                         2020
                                                  Corporate           Investment         Private         Asset          Capital    Corporate &            Total
in € m.                                               Bank                  Bank           Bank     Management     Release Unit         Other     consolidated
Noninterest expenses                                  4,243               5,418          7,513          1,526           1,947             568         21,216
Impairment of goodwill and other
intangible assets                                         0                   0              0              0               0               0              0
Litigation charges, net                                  99                  20             83             (1)             25             (67)           158
Restructuring and severance                              79                  26            520             37              17              10            688
Adjusted costs                                        4,066               5,373          6,911          1,490           1,905             625         20,370
Transformation charges                                   59                  84            122              5             162              58            490
Adjusted costs ex. transformation
charges                                               4,007               5,289          6,788          1,485           1,743             567         19,880
Expenses eligible for reimbursement
related to Prime Finance                                                                                                                                  360
Adjusted costs ex. transformation
charges and expenses eligible for
reimbursement related to Prime
Finance                                                                                                                                               19,520
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure



                                                                                                                                                           2019
                                                    Corporate          Investment         Private         Asset          Capital    Corporate &            Total
in € m.                                                 Bank                 Bank           Bank     Management     Release Unit         Other     consolidated
Noninterest expenses                                   4,877               6,397           8,159          1,711           3,400            531          25,076
Impairment of goodwill and other
intangible assets                                        492                   0             545              0               0              0           1,037
Litigation charges, net                                   (4)                135             (21)            (5)            129            238             473
Restructuring and severance                              150                 218             156             41             157             83             805
Adjusted costs                                         4,239               6,044           7,479          1,675           3,115            209          22,761
Transformation charges                                   160                 211             190             30             510             43           1145
Adjusted costs ex. transformation
charges                                                4,079               5,832           7,290          1,644           2,605            166          21,616
Expenses eligible for reimbursement
related to Prime Finance                                                                                                                                    102
Adjusted costs ex. transformation
charges and expenses eligible for
reimbursement related to Prime
Finance                                                                                                                                                 21,514
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure




                                                                                                                                                          444
Deutsche Bank                                                          Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                     Revenues on a currency adjusted basis




Revenues excluding specific items
Revenues excluding specific items is a performance indicator that is a non-GAAP financial measure most directly comparable
to the IFRS financial measure net revenues. Revenues excluding specific items is calculated by adjusting net revenues under
IFRS for specific revenue items which generally fall outside the usual nature or scope of the business and are likely to distort
an accurate assessment of the divisional operating performance. Excluded items are Debt Valuation Adjustment (DVA) and
material transactions or events that are either one-off in nature or belong to a portfolio of connected transactions or events
where the P&L impact is limited to a specific period of time. The Group believes that a presentation of net revenues excluding
the impact of these items provides a more meaningful depiction of the revenues associated with the business.

                                                                                                                                                                       2021
                                                  Corporate            Investment          Private            Asset             Capital       Corporate &               Total
in € m.                                               Bank                   Bank            Bank        Management        Release Unit            Other        consolidated
Revenues                                              5,150                9,631            8,234              2,708                26              (339)           25,410
DVA                                                       0                  (28)               0                  0                (2)                0               (30)
Sale of PB Systems to TCS                                 0                    0                0                  0                 0                 0                 0
Change in valuation of an investment
- FIC S&T                                                  0                    0               0                 0                  0                 0                   0
Sal. Oppenheim workout
- International Private Bank (IPB)                         0                    0             103                 0                  0                 0                103
Update in valuation methodology –
CRU                                                       0                    0                0                  0                 0                 0                 0
Total Specific revenue items                              0                  (28)             103                  0                (2)                0                73
Revenues excluding specific items                     5,150                9,659            8,132              2,708                28              (339)           25,337



                                                                                                                                                                       2020
                                                  Corporate            Investment          Private            Asset             Capital       Corporate &               Total
in € m.                                               Bank                   Bank            Bank        Management        Release Unit            Other        consolidated
Revenues                                              5,146                9,286            8,126              2,229              (225)             (534)           24,028
DVA                                                       0                    6                0                  0                (8)                0                (2)
Sale of PB Systems to TCS                               (16)                   0              (88)                 0                 0                 0              (104)
Change in valuation of an investment
- FIC S&T                                                  0                  22                0                 0                  0                 0                 22
Sal. Oppenheim workout
- International Private Bank (IPB)                         0                    0             114                 0                  0                 0                114
Update in valuation methodology –
CRU                                                       0                    0                0                  0                 0                 0                 0
Total Specific revenue items                            (16)                  28               26                  0                (8)                0                30
Revenues excluding specific items                     5,161                9,258            8,100              2,229              (217)             (534)           23,998
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.




                                                                                                                                                                         2019
                                                    Corporate            Investment          Private           Asset             Capital       Corporate &               Total
in € m.                                                 Bank                   Bank            Bank       Management        Release Unit            Other        consolidated
Revenues                                               5,247                 7,023           8,239              2,332               217               107             23,165
DVA                                                        0                  (140)              0                  0               (35)                0               (175)
Sale of PB Systems to TCS                                  0                     0               0                  0                 0                 0                  0
Change in valuation of an investment
- FIC S&T                                                      0               143                   0                 0                  0                 0             143
Sal. Oppenheim workout
- International Private Bank (IPB)                             0                    0          105                     0                  0                 0             105
Update in valuation methodology –
CRU                                                        0                     0               0                  0               (81)                0                (81)
Total Specific revenue items                               0                     3             105                  0              (116)                0                 (8)
Revenues excluding specific items                      5,247                 7,020           8,134              2,332               332               107             23,173
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure.




Revenues on a currency adjusted basis
Revenues on a currency-adjusted basis is calculated by translating prior-period revenues that were generated in non-euro
currencies into euros at the foreign exchange rates that prevailed during the current year period. These adjusted figures, and
period-to-period percentage changes based thereon, are intended to provide information on the development of underlying
business volumes.




                                                                                                                                                                        445
Deutsche Bank                                                         Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                    Adjusted profit (loss) before tax




Adjusted profit (loss) before tax
Adjusted profit (loss) before tax is calculated by adjusting the profit (loss) before tax under IFRS for specific revenue items,
transformation charges, impairments of goodwill and other intangibles, as well as restructuring and severance expenses. The
Group believes that a presentation of profit (losses) before tax excluding the impact of the foregoing items provides a more
meaningful depiction of the profitability of the operating business.

                                                                                                                                                              2021
                                                  Corporate           Investment             Private           Asset         Capital    Corporate &            Total
in € m.                                               Bank                  Bank               Bank       Management    Release Unit         Other     consolidated
Profit (loss) before tax                              1,000                3,715                366             816          (1,364)        (1,143)          3,390
Specific revenue items                                    0                   28               (103)              0               2              0             (73)
Transformation charges                                   58                   60                221               3              57            603           1,003
Impairment of goodwill / other
intangibles                                               5                    0                  0               0               0              0               5
Restructuring & severance                               111                   87                237              21               6              7             470
Adjusted profit (loss) before tax                     1,174                3,891                721             840          (1,298)          (532)          4,795



                                                                                                                                                              2020
                                                  Corporate           Investment             Private           Asset         Capital    Corporate &            Total
in € m.                                               Bank                  Bank               Bank       Management    Release Unit         Other     consolidated
Profit (loss) before tax                                539                3,166                (99)            544          (2,200)          (929)          1,021
Specific revenue items                                   16                  (28)               (26)              0               8              0             (30)
Transformation charges                                   59                   84                122               5             162             58             490
Impairment of goodwill / other
intangibles                                               0                    0                  0               0               0              0               0
Restructuring & severance                                79                   26                520              37              17             10             688
Adjusted profit (loss) before tax                       692                3,247                518             586          (2,013)          (861)          2,169
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure



                                                                                                                                                                2019
                                                    Corporate           Investment             Private          Asset         Capital    Corporate &            Total
in € m.                                                 Bank                  Bank               Bank      Management    Release Unit         Other     consolidated
Profit (loss) before tax                                  86                   496              (263)            468          (3,170)          (251)         (2,634)
Specific revenue items                                     0                    (3)             (105)              0             116              0               8
Transformation charges                                   160                   211               190              30             510             43           1,145
Impairment of goodwill / other
intangibles                                              492                     0               545               0               0              0           1,037
Restructuring & severance                                150                   218               156              41             157             83             805
Adjusted profit (loss) before tax                        888                   924               522             540          (2,388)          (124)            361
Prior year segmental information presented in the current structure




                                                                                                                                                               446
Deutsche Bank                                               Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                          Book Value and Tangible Book Value per Basic Share Outstanding




Adjustments regarding BGH ruling on pricing agreements for
Private Bank
In the second quarter of 2021, the bank introduced a pro-forma disclosure, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, that
excludes impacts related to a BGH ruling on pricing agreements from PB’s revenues, profit before tax and post-tax return on
average tangible shareholder’s equity. The bank introduced this disclosure to improve comparability of PB’s operational trends
compared to the prior quarters.

in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                        2021          2020      2019
Net Revenues                                                                                                   8,234          8,126     8,239
BGH ruling on pricing agreements - impact of forgone revenues                                                    154              –         –
  of which: Private Bank Germany - BGH ruling on pricing agreements - impact of forgone
  revenues                                                                                                       152              –         –
Net revenues ex BGH ruling on pricing agreements                                                               8,388          8,126     8,239
  of which: Private Bank Germany net revenues ex BGH ruling on pricing agreements                              5,160          4,989     5,109
Revenue specific items                                                                                          (103)           (26)     (105)
Net revenues ex specific items ex BGH ruling on pricing agreements                                             8,285          8,100     8,134
  therein: Private Bank Germany – revenues ex specific items ex BGH ruling on pricing
  agreements                                                                                                   5,160          5,077     5,109

Adjusted profit (loss) before tax                                                                                721            518       522
BGH ruling - total impact                                                                                        284              –         –
  of which: impact of forgone revenues                                                                           154              –         –
  of which: impact of additional adjusted costs                                                                    2              –         –
  of which: impact of litigation charges                                                                         128              –         –
Adjusted profit (loss) before tax ex BGH ruling on pricing agreements                                          1,005            518       522
Adjusted profit (loss) ex BGH ruling on pricing agreements                                                       724            373       376
Profit (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests                                                             –              –         –
Profit (loss) attributable to additional equity components                                                        97             79        64
Adjusted Profit (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders ex BGH ruling on pricing
agreements                                                                                                       627             293       312
Average allocated tangible shareholders' equity                                                               11,408          10,298    10,345
Adjusted post-tax RoTE ex BGH ruling on pricing agreements (in %)                                              5.5 %           2.8 %     3.0 %
Reported post-tax RoTE (in %)                                                                                  1.5 %         (1.5) %   (2.4) %




Net assets (adjusted)
Net assets (adjusted) are defined as IFRS Total assets adjusted to reflect the recognition of legal netting agreements, offsetting
of cash collateral received and paid and offsetting pending settlements balances. The Group believes that a presentation of
net assets (adjusted) makes comparisons to its competitors easier.

in € m.
(unless stated otherwise)                                                                                        2021          2020      2019
Total assets                                                                                                   1,324          1,325     1,298
Deduct: Derivatives (incl. hedging derivatives) credit line netting                                              239            266       266
Deduct: Derivatives cash collateral received / paid                                                               65             83        74
Deduct: Securities Financing Transactions credit line netting                                                      2              1         1
Deduct: Pending settlements netting                                                                               15             12        10
Net assets (adjusted)                                                                                          1,002            963       946




Book Value and Tangible Book Value per Basic Share
Outstanding
Book value per basic share outstanding and tangible book value per basic share outstanding are non-GAAP financial
measures that are used and relied upon by investors and industry analysts as capital adequacy metrics. Book value per basic
share outstanding represents the Bank’s total shareholders’ equity divided by the number of basic shares outstanding at
period-end. Tangible book value represents the Bank’s total shareholders’ equity less goodwill and other intangible assets.
Tangible book value per basic share outstanding is computed by dividing tangible book value by period-end basic shares
outstanding.


                                                                                                                                         447
Deutsche Bank                                                         Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Annual Report 2021                                                    Regulatory fully loaded measures




Tangible Book Value
                                                                                                         2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                 from 2020                  from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                                  2021               2020            2019       in € m.            in %    in € m.            in %
Total shareholders’ equity (Book
value)                                                  58,027             54,786          55,857         3,242                6    (1,071)              (2)
Goodwill and other intangible assets1                   (6,079)            (5,997)         (6,254)          (82)               1       257               (4)
Tangible shareholders’ equity
(Tangible
book value)                                             51,949             48,789          49,603         3,160                6      (815)              (2)
1
    Excludes Goodwill and other intangible assets attributable to partial sale of DWS.


Basic Shares Outstanding
                                                                                                         2021 increase (decrease)   2020 increase (decrease)
in € m.                                                                                                                 from 2020                  from 2019
(unless stated otherwise)                                 2021               2020             2019       in € m.            in %    in € m.            in %
Number of shares                                       2,066.8            2,066.8          2,066.8             0               0          0               0
Shares outstanding:
  Treasury shares                                         (0.7)              (1.3)            (0.7)         0.6            (47.7)     (0.6)            94.0
  Vested share awards                                     34.5               38.6             52.4         (4.1)           (10.7)    (13.8)           (26.3)
Basic shares outstanding                               2,100.6            2,104.1          2,118.5         (3.5)            (0.2)    (14.4)            (0.7)

Book value per basic share
outstanding in €                                          27.62              26.04           26.37         1.58              6.1     (0.33)            (1.3)
Tangible book value per basic share
outstanding in €                                          24.73              23.19           23.41         1.54              6.6     (0.22)            (0.9)




Regulatory fully loaded measures
Our regulatory assets, exposures, risk-weighted assets, capital and ratios thereof are calculated for regulatory purposes and
are set forth throughout this document under the CRR/CRD as currently applicable.

We present in this report certain figures based on the CRR definition of own fund instruments applicable for Additional Tier 1
(AT1) capital and Tier 2 (T2) capital and figures based thereon, including Tier 1, Total Capital and Leverage Ratio) on a “fully
loaded” basis. We calculate such “fully loaded” figures excluding the transitional arrangements for own fund instruments as
provided in the currently applicable CRR/CRD.

Our CET1 and RWA figures include the transitional impacts from the IFRS 9 add-back also in the “fully-loaded” figures given
it is an immaterial difference.

Transitional arrangements are applicable for AT1 and T2 instruments. Capital instruments issued on or prior to December 31,
2011, that no longer qualify as AT1 or T2 capital under the fully loaded CRR/CRD as currently applicable are subject to
grandfathering rules during the transitional period and are being phased out from 2013 to 2022 with their recognition capped
at 20 % in 2020 and 10 % in 2021 (in relation to the portfolio eligible for grandfathering which was still in issue on December
31, 2012) with grandfathering phasing out completely from January 1, 2022.

The current CRR as applicable since June 27, 2019 provides further grandfathering rules for AT1 and T2 instruments issued
prior to June 27, 2019. Thereunder, AT1 and T2 instruments issued through special purpose entities are grandfathered until
December 31, 2021. Beyond 2021, transitional arrangements only exist for AT1 and T2 instruments which continue to qualify
until June 26, 2025 even if they do not meet certain new requirements that apply since June 27, 2019. We have immaterial
amounts of such instruments outstanding at yearend 2021, which practically removes the difference between “fully loaded”
and “transitional” AT1 and T2 instruments starting from January 1, 2022.

We believe that these “fully loaded” calculations provide useful information to investors as they reflect our progress against
known future the regulatory capital standards. Many of our competitors have been describing calculations on a “fully loaded”
basis, however, our competitors’ assumptions and estimates regarding “fully loaded” calculations may vary such that our “fully
loaded” measures may not be comparable with similarly labelled measures used by our competitors.




                                                                                                                                                      448
Deutsche Bank                                   Declaration of Backing
Annual Report 2021




Declaration of Backing

Deutsche Bank AG ensures, except in the case of political risk, that the following subsidiaries are able to meet their
contractual liabilities:




D B Investments (GB) Limited, London                                 Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, New York

DB International (Asia) Limited, Singapore                           Deutsche Holdings (Grand Duchy) (formerly Deutsche
                                                                     Holdings (Malta) S.à r.l.), Luxembourg,

Deutsche Australia Limited, Sydney                                   Deutsche Immobilien Leasing GmbH, Düsseldorf

DEUTSCHE BANK A.Ş., Istanbul                                         Deutsche Morgan Grenfell Group Limited (formerly
                                                                     Deutsche Morgan Grenfell Group Public Limited
                                                                     Company), London
Deutsche Bank Americas Holding Corp., Wilmington
                                                                     Deutsche Securities Inc., Tokyo
Deutsche Bank (China) Co., Ltd., Beijing
                                                                     Deutsche Securities Asia Limited, Hong Kong
Deutsche Bank Europe GmbH, Frankfurt am Main
                                                                     Deutsche Securities Saudi Arabia (a closed joint stock
                                                                     company), Riyadh
Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A., Luxembourg
                                                                     norisbank GmbH, Bonn
Deutsche Bank (Malaysia) Berhad, Kuala Lumpur
                                                                     Joint Stock Company Deutsche Bank DBU, Kiev
Deutsche Bank Polska Spółka Akcyjna, Warsaw
                                                                     OOO “Deutsche Bank”, Moscow
Deutsche Bank S.A. – Banco Alemão, São Paulo
                                                                     Deutsche Oppenheim Family Office AG, Cologne
Deutsche Bank, Sociedad Anónima Española, Madrid
                                                                     BHW Bausparkasse Aktiengesellschaft, Hameln
Deutsche Bank Società per Azioni, Milan

Deutsche Bank (Suisse) SA, Geneva                                    PB Factoring GmbH, Bonn




                                                                                                                              449
Deutsche Bank                                                         Group Five-Year Record
Annual Report 2021




Group Five-Year Record
in € m.                                                                                  2021                 2020                 2019                 2018                 2017
Net interest income                                                                   11,155               11,526               13,749               13,316               12,378
Provision for credit losses                                                              515                1,792                  723                 (525)                 525
Net interest income after provision for credit losses                                 10,640                9,734               13,026               12,791               11,853
Commissions and fee income                                                            10,934                9,424                9,520               10,039               11,002
Net gains (losses) on financial assets/liabilities
at fair value through profit or loss                                                   3,045                2,465                  193                1,209                2,926
Other noninterest income (loss)                                                          277                  614                 (298)                 753                  142
Total net revenues                                                                    25,410               24,028               23,165               25,316               26,447
Compensation and benefits                                                             10,418               10,471               11,142               11,814               12,253
General and administrative expenses                                                   10,821               10,259               12,253               11,286               11,973
Policyholder benefits and claims                                                           0                    0                    0                    0                    0
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets                                         5                    0                1,037                    0                   21
Restructuring activities                                                                 261                  485                  644                  360                  447
Total noninterest expenses                                                            21,505               21,216               25,076               23,461               24,695
Income (loss) before income taxes                                                      3,390                1,021               (2,634)               1,330                1,228
Income tax expense                                                                       880                  397                2,630                  989                1,963
Net income (loss)                                                                      2,510                  624               (5,265)                 341                 (735)
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests                                      144                  129                  125                   75                   15
Net income (loss) attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders
and additional equity components                                                       2,365                  495               (5,390)                  267                 (751)

in €
(unless stated otherwise)
Basic earnings per share1,2                                                              0.96                 0.07                (2.71)               (0.01)               (0.53)
Diluted earnings per share1,3                                                            0.93                 0.07                (2.71)               (0.01)               (0.53)
Dividends paid per share4                                                                0.00                 0.00                 0.11                 0.11                 0.196
Dividends paid per share in U.S.$5                                                       0.00                 0.00                 0.13                 0.13                 0.21
1
    The number of average basic shares outstanding has been adjusted for all periods before April 2017 in order to reflect the effect of the bonus element of the subscription rights
    issue in connection with the capital increase in April 2017.
2
    We calculate basic earnings per share for each period by dividing our net income attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders by the average number of common shares
    outstanding. Earnings were adjusted by € 363 million, € 349 million and € 330 million, before tax, € 292 million and € 298 million net of tax for the coupons paid on Additional
    Tier 1 Notes in April 2021, April 2020, April 2019, April 2018 and April 2017, respectively. Since 2019 the tax impact is recognized in net income (loss) directly.
3
    We calculate diluted earnings per share for each period by dividing our net income attributable to Deutsche Bank shareholders by the average number of common shares
    outstanding, both after assumed conversions. Earnings were adjusted by € 363 million, € 349 million and € 330 million before tax, € 292 million and € 298 million net of tax for
    the coupons paid on Additional Tier 1 Notes in April 2021, April 2020, April 2019, April 2018 and April 2017, respectively. For 2019, 2017 and 2016, there was no dilutive effect
    as the Group reported a net loss. There was no dilutive effect for 2018 as the net income was offset by coupons paid on Additional Tier 1 Notes
4
    Dividends declared and paid in the year.
5
    Dividends declared and paid in U.S.$ were translated from euro into U.S.$ based on the exchange rates as of the respective payment days.
6
    The dividend paid in 2017 consisted of € 0.11 for 2016 and of € 0.08 for 2015 that were paid simultaneously in 2017 after the agreement by the annual general meeting in 2017.


                                                                                         2021                 2020                 2019                 2018                 2017
                                                                                       in € m.              in € m.              in € m.              in € m.              in € m.
Total assets                                                                      1,323,993            1,325,259            1,297,674            1,348,137            1,474,732
Loans at amortized cost                                                             471,319              426,995              429,841              400,297              401,699
Deposits                                                                            603,750              568,031              572,208              564,405              581,873
Long-term debt                                                                      144,485              149,163              136,473              152,083              159,715
Common shares1                                                                        5,291                5,291                5,291                5,291                5,291
Total shareholders’ equity2                                                          58,027               54,786               55,857               62,495               63,174
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CRR/CRD 4)2                                            46,506               44,885               44,148               47,486               50,808
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CRR/CRD 4 fully loaded)2                               46,506               44,885               44,148               47,486               48,300
Tier 1 capital (CRR/CRD 4)2                                                          55,375               51,734               50,546               55,091               57,631
Tier 1 capital (CRR/CRD 4 fully loaded)2                                             54,775               50,634               48,733               52,082               52,921
Total regulatory capital (CRR/CRD 4)2                                                62,732               58,677               56,503               61,292               64,016
Total regulatory capital (CRR/CRD 4 fully loaded)2                                   62,102               57,257               56,503               61,292               63,250
1
    Capital increased from authorized capital against cash contributions through a public offering with subscription rights in April 2017.
2
    Figures presented based on the transitional rules (“CRR/CRD 4”) and the full application (“CRR/CRD 4 fully loaded”) of the CRR/CRD 4 framework.




                                                                                                                                                                            450
Deutsche Bank                           Imprint / Publications
Annual Report 2021




Imprint / Publications



Deutsche Bank                                  Cautionary statement regarding
Aktiengesellschaft                             forward-looking statements
Taunusanlage 12
60325 Frankfurt am Main                        This report contains forward-looking statements.
(for letters and postcards: 60262)             Forward-looking statements are statements that
Germany                                        are not historical facts; they include statements
Telephone: +49 69 910-00                       about our beliefs and expectations and the
deutsche.bank@db.com                           assumptions underlying them. These statements
                                               are based on plans, estimates and projections as
                                               they are currently available to the management of
Contact for shareholders                       Deutsche Bank. Forward-looking statements
+49 800 910-8000                               therefore speak only as of the date they are
db.ir@db.com                                   made, and we undertake no obligation to update
                                               publicly any of them in light of new information or
                                               future events.
AGM Hotline
+49 6196 8870704
                                               By their very nature, forward-looking statements
                                               involve risks and uncertainties. A number of
Online                                         important factors could therefore cause actual
All publications relating to our               results to differ materially from those contained in
financial reporting are available at:          any forward-looking statement. Such factors
www.db.com/reports                             include the conditions in the financial markets in
                                               Germany, in Europe, in the United States and
                                               elsewhere from which we derive a substantial
Publication                                    portion of our revenues and in which we hold a
Published on March 11, 2022                    substantial portion of our assets, the development
                                               of asset prices and market volatility, potential
                                               defaults of borrowers or trading counterparties,
                                               the implementation of our strategic initiatives,
                                               the reliability of our risk management policies,
                                               procedures and methods, and other risks
                                               referenced in our filings with the U.S. Securities
                                               and Exchange Commission. Such factors are
                                               described in detail in our SEC Form 20-F of
                                               March 11, 2022 under the heading “Risk Factors.”
                                               Copies of this document are readily available
                                               upon request or can be downloaded from
                                               www.db.com/ir.




                                                                                                      451
Our Purpose
This is why we’re here. This is what we do.


We are here to enable economic
growth and societal progress,
by creating positive impact for
our clients, our people, our
investors and our communities.
#PositiveImpact




2022                                       2023
Financial Calendar                         Financial Calendar


April 27, 2022                             February 2, 2023
Earnings Report as of March 31, 2022       Preliminary results for the 2022 financial year

May 19, 2022                               March 17, 2023
Annual General Meeting                     Annual Report 2022 and Form 20-F

July 27, 2022                              April 27, 2023
Interim Report as of June 30, 2022         Earnings Report as of March 31, 2023

October 26, 2022                           May 17, 2023
Earnings Report as of September 30, 2022   Annual General Meeting

                                           July 26, 2023
                                           Interim Report as of June 30, 2023

                                           October 25, 2023
                                           Earnings Report as of September 30, 2023
